\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename WritingWithInk.info
@settitle Writing with ink
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@copying
@quotation
Copyright (c) 2017 inkle Ltd.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Interactive fiction
@direntry
* Writing with ink: (WritingWithInk). Using the ink interactive fiction language.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Writing with ink
@author inkle Ltd.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Writing with ink

@strong{ink} is a scripting language built around the idea of marking
up pure-text with flow in order to produce interactive scripts.

At its most basic, it can be used to write a Choose Your Own-style
story, or a branching dialogue tree. But its real strength is in
writing dialogues with lots of options and lots of recombination of
the flow.

@strong{ink} offers several features to enable non-technical writers
to branch often, and play out the consequences of those branches, in
both minor and major ways, without fuss.

The script aims to be clean and logically ordered, so branching
dialogue can be tested "by eye". The flow is described in a
declarative fashion where possible.

It's also designed with redrafting in mind; so editing a flow should
be fast.

@quotation
Copyright (c) 2017 inkle Ltd.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@end quotation
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Writing with ink::
* Part One The Basics::
* Part 2 Weave::
* Part 3 Variables and Logic::
* Part 4 Advanced Flow Control::
* Part 5 Advanced State Tracking::
* Part 6 International character support in identifiers::
@end menu

@node Writing with ink
@chapter Writing with ink
@anchor{#writing-with-ink}
@itemize
@item
@ref{#introduction,Introduction}
@item
@ref{#part-one-the-basics,Part One: The Basics}
@itemize
@item
@ref{#1-content,1) Content}
@item
@ref{#2-choices,2) Choices}
@item
@ref{#3-knots,3) Knots}
@item
@ref{#4-diverts,4) Diverts}
@item
@ref{#5-branching-the-flow,5) Branching The Flow}
@item
@ref{#6-includes-and-stitches,6) Includes and Stitches}
@item
@ref{#7-varying-choices,7) Varying Choices}
@item
@ref{#8-variable-text,8) Variable Text}
@item
@ref{#9-game-queries-and-functions,9) Game Queries and Functions}
@end itemize

@item
@ref{#part-2-weave,Part 2: Weave}
@itemize
@item
@ref{#1-gathers,1) Gathers}
@item
@ref{#2-nested-flow,2) Nested Flow}
@item
@ref{#3-tracking-a-weave,3) Tracking a Weave}
@end itemize

@item
@ref{#part-3-variables-and-logic,Part 3: Variables and Logic}
@itemize
@item
@ref{#1-global-variables,1) Global Variables}
@item
@ref{#2-logic,2) Logic}
@item
@ref{#3-conditional-blocks-ifelse,3) Conditional blocks (if/else)}
@item
@ref{#4-temporary-variables,4) Temporary Variables}
@item
@ref{#5-functions,5) Functions}
@item
@ref{#6-constants,6) Constants}
@item
@ref{#7-advanced-game-side-logic,7) Advanced: Game-side logic}
@end itemize

@item
@ref{#part-4-advanced-flow-control,Part 4: Advanced Flow Control}
@itemize
@item
@ref{#1-tunnels,1) Tunnels}
@item
@ref{#2-threads,2) Threads}
@end itemize

@item
@ref{#part-5-advanced-state-tracking,Part 5: Advanced State Tracking}
@itemize
@item
@ref{#1-basic-lists,1) Basic Lists}
@item
@ref{#2-reusing-lists,2) Reusing Lists}
@item
@ref{#3-list-values,3) List Values}
@item
@ref{#4-multivalued-lists,4) Multivalued Lists}
@item
@ref{#5-advanced-list-operations,5) Advanced List Operations}
@item
@ref{#6-multi-list-lists,6) Multi-list Lists}
@item
@ref{#7-long-example-crime-scene,7) Long example: crime scene}
@item
@ref{#8-summary,8) Summary}
@end itemize

@item
@ref{#part-6-international-character-support-in-identifiers,Part 6:
International character support in identifiers}
@end itemize

@menu
* Introduction::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@section Introduction
@anchor{#introduction}
@strong{ink} is a scripting language built around the idea of marking up
pure-text with flow in order to produce interactive scripts.

At its most basic, it can be used to write a Choose Your Own-style
story, or a branching dialogue tree. But its real strength is in writing
dialogues with lots of options and lots of recombination of the flow.

@strong{ink} offers several features to enable non-technical writers to
branch often, and play out the consequences of those branches, in both
minor and major ways, without fuss.

The script aims to be clean and logically ordered, so branching dialogue
can be tested "by eye". The flow is described in a declarative fashion
where possible.

It's also designed with redrafting in mind; so editing a flow should be
fast.

@node Part One The Basics
@chapter Part One: The Basics
@anchor{#part-one-the-basics}

@menu
* 1 Content::
* 2 Choices::
* 3 Knots::
* 4 Diverts::
* 5 Branching The Flow::
* 6 Includes and Stitches::
* 7 Varying Choices::
* 8 Variable Text::
* 9 Game Queries and Functions::
@end menu

@node 1 Content
@section 1) Content
@anchor{#1-content}

@menu
* The simplest ink script::
* Comments::
* Tags::
@end menu

@node The simplest ink script
@subsection The simplest ink script
@anchor{#the-simplest-ink-script}
The most basic ink script is just text in a .ink file.

@verbatim
Hello, world!
@end verbatim

On running, this will output the content, and then stop.

Text on separate lines produces new paragraphs. The script:

@verbatim
Hello, world!
Hello?
Hello, are you there?
@end verbatim

produces output that looks the same.

@node Comments
@subsection Comments
@anchor{#comments}
By default, all text in your file will appear in the output content,
unless specially marked up.

The simplest mark-up is a comment. @strong{ink} supports two kinds of
comment. There's the kind used for someone reading the code, which the
compiler ignores:

@verbatim
"What do you make of this?" she asked.

// Something unprintable...

"I couldn't possibly comment," I replied.

/*
    ... or an unlimited block of text
*/
@end verbatim

and there's the kind used for reminding the author what they need to do,
that the compiler prints out during compilation:

@verbatim
TODO: Write this section properly!
@end verbatim

@node Tags
@subsection Tags
@anchor{#tags}
Text content from the game will appear 'as is' when the engine runs.
However, it can sometimes be useful to mark up a line of content with
extra information to tell the game what to do with that content.

@strong{ink} provides a simple system for tagging lines of content, with
hashtags.

@verbatim
A line of normal game-text. # colour it blue
@end verbatim

These don't show up in the main text flow, but can be read off by the
game and used as you see fit. See
@uref{RunningYourInk.md#marking-up-your-ink-content-with-tags,Running
Your Ink} for more information.

@node 2 Choices
@section 2) Choices
@anchor{#2-choices}
Input is offered to the player via text choices. A text choice is
indicated by an @code{*} character.

If no other flow instructions are given, once made, the choice will flow
into the next line of text.

@verbatim
Hello world!
*   Hello back!
    Nice to hear from you!
@end verbatim

This produces the following game:

@verbatim
Hello world!
1: Hello back!

> 1
Hello back!
Nice to hear from you!
@end verbatim

By default, the text of a choice appears again, in the output.

@menu
* Suppressing choice text::
* Multiple Choices::
@end menu

@node Suppressing choice text
@subsection Suppressing choice text
@anchor{#suppressing-choice-text}
Some games separate the text of a choice from its outcome. In
@strong{ink}, if the choice text is given in square brackets, the text
of the choice will not be printed into response.

@verbatim
Hello world!
*   [Hello back!]
    Nice to hear from you!
@end verbatim

produces

@verbatim
Hello world!
1: Hello back!

> 1
Nice to hear from you!
@end verbatim

@menu
* Advanced mixing choice and output text::
@end menu

@node Advanced mixing choice and output text
@subsubsection Advanced: mixing choice and output text
@anchor{#advanced-mixing-choice-and-output-text}
The square brackets in fact divide up the option content. What's before
is printed in both choice and output; what's inside only in choice; and
what's after, only in output. Effectively, they provide alternative ways
for a line to end.

@verbatim
Hello world!
*   Hello [back!] right back to you!
    Nice to hear from you!
@end verbatim

produces:

@verbatim
Hello world!
1: Hello back!
> 1
Hello right back to you!
Nice to hear from you!
@end verbatim

This is most useful when writing dialogue choices:

@verbatim
"What's that?" my master asked.
*   "I am somewhat tired[."]," I repeated.
    "Really," he responded. "How deleterious."
@end verbatim

produces:

@verbatim
"What's that?" my master asked.
1: "I am somewhat tired."
> 1
"I am somewhat tired," I repeated.
"Really," he responded. "How deleterious."
@end verbatim

@node Multiple Choices
@subsection Multiple Choices
@anchor{#multiple-choices}
To make choices really choices, we need to provide alternatives. We can
do this simply by listing them:

@verbatim
"What's that?" my master asked.
*   "I am somewhat tired[."]," I repeated.
    "Really," he responded. "How deleterious."
*   "Nothing, Monsieur!"[] I replied.
    "Very good, then."
*  "I said, this journey is appalling[."] and I want no more of it."
    "Ah," he replied, not unkindly. "I see you are feeling frustrated. Tomorrow, things will improve."
@end verbatim

This produces the following game:

@verbatim
"What's that?" my master asked.

1: "I am somewhat tired."
2: "Nothing, Monsieur!"
3: "I said, this journey is appalling."

> 3
"I said, this journey is appalling and I want no more of it."
"Ah," he replied, not unkindly. "I see you are feeling frustrated. Tomorrow, things will improve."
@end verbatim

The above syntax is enough to write a single set of choices. In a real
game, we'll want to move the flow from one point to another based on
what the player chooses. To do that, we need to introduce a bit more
structure.

@node 3 Knots
@section 3) Knots
@anchor{#3-knots}

@menu
* Pieces of content are called knots::
* Writing a knot::
@end menu

@node Pieces of content are called knots
@subsection Pieces of content are called knots
@anchor{#pieces-of-content-are-called-knots}
To allow the game to branch we need to mark up sections of content with
names (as an old-fashioned gamebook does with its 'Paragraph 18', and
the like.)

These sections are called "knots" and they're the fundamental structural
unit of ink content.

@node Writing a knot
@subsection Writing a knot
@anchor{#writing-a-knot}
The start of a knot is indicated by two or more equals signs, as
follows.

@verbatim
=== top_knot ===
@end verbatim

(The equals signs on the end are optional; and the name needs to be a
single word with no spaces.)

The start of a knot is a header; the content that follows will be inside
that knot.

@verbatim
=== back_in_london ===

We arrived into London at 9.45pm exactly.
@end verbatim

@menu
* Advanced a knottier "hello world"::
@end menu

@node Advanced a knottier "hello world"
@subsubsection Advanced: a knottier "hello world"
@anchor{#advanced-a-knottier-hello-world}
When you start an ink file, content outside of knots will be run
automatically. But knots won't. So if you start using knots to hold your
content, you'll need to tell the game where to go. We do this with a
divert arrow @code{->}, which is covered properly in the next section.

The simplest knotty script is:

@verbatim
-> top_knot

=== top_knot ===
Hello world!
@end verbatim

However, @strong{ink} doesn't like loose ends, and produces a warning on
compilation and/or run-time when it thinks this has happened. The script
above produces this on compilation:

@verbatim
WARNING: Apparent loose end exists where the flow runs out. Do you need a '-> END' statement, choice or divert? on line 3 of tests/test.ink
@end verbatim

and this on running:

@verbatim
Runtime error in tests/test.ink line 3: ran out of content. Do you need a '-> DONE' or '-> END'?
@end verbatim

The following plays and compiles without error:

@verbatim
=== top_knot ===
Hello world!
-> END
@end verbatim

@code{-> END} is a marker for both the writer and the compiler; it means
"the story flow should now stop".

@node 4 Diverts
@section 4) Diverts
@anchor{#4-diverts}

@menu
* Knots divert to knots::
@end menu

@node Knots divert to knots
@subsection Knots divert to knots
@anchor{#knots-divert-to-knots}
You can tell the story to move from one knot to another using @code{->},
a "divert arrow". Diverts happen immediately without any user input.

@verbatim
=== back_in_london ===

We arrived into London at 9.45pm exactly.
-> hurry_home

=== hurry_home ===
We hurried home to Savile Row as fast as we could.
@end verbatim

@menu
* Diverts are invisible::
* Glue::
@end menu

@node Diverts are invisible
@subsubsection Diverts are invisible
@anchor{#diverts-are-invisible}
Diverts are intended to be seamless and can even happen mid-sentence:

@verbatim
=== hurry_home ===
We hurried home to Savile Row -> as_fast_as_we_could

=== as_fast_as_we_could ===
as fast as we could.
@end verbatim

produces the same line as above:

@verbatim
We hurried home to Savile Row as fast as we could.
@end verbatim

@node Glue
@subsubsection Glue
@anchor{#glue}
The default behaviour inserts line-breaks before every new line of
content. In some cases, however, content must insist on not having a
line-break, and it can do so using @code{<>}, or "glue".

@verbatim
=== hurry_home ===
We hurried home <>
-> to_savile_row

=== to_savile_row ===
to Savile Row
-> as_fast_as_we_could

=== as_fast_as_we_could ===
<> as fast as we could.
@end verbatim

also produces:

@verbatim
We hurried home to Savile Row as fast as we could.
@end verbatim

You can't use too much glue: multiple glues next to each other have no
additional effect. (And there's no way to "negate" a glue; once a line
is sticky, it'll stick.)

@node 5 Branching The Flow
@section 5) Branching The Flow
@anchor{#5-branching-the-flow}

@menu
* Basic branching::
* Branching and joining::
* The story flow::
@end menu

@node Basic branching
@subsection Basic branching
@anchor{#basic-branching}
Combining knots, options and diverts gives us the basic structure of a
choose-your-own game.

@verbatim
=== paragraph_1 ===
You stand by the wall of Analand, sword in hand.
* [Open the gate] -> paragraph_2
* [Smash down the gate] -> paragraph_3
* [Turn back and go home] -> paragraph_4

=== paragraph_2 ===
You open the gate, and step out onto the path.

...
@end verbatim

@node Branching and joining
@subsection Branching and joining
@anchor{#branching-and-joining}
Using diverts, the writer can branch the flow, and join it back up
again, without showing the player that the flow has rejoined.

@verbatim
=== back_in_london ===

We arrived into London at 9.45pm exactly.

*   "There is not a moment to lose!"[] I declared.
    -> hurry_outside

*   "Monsieur, let us savour this moment!"[] I declared.
    My master clouted me firmly around the head and dragged me out of the door.
    -> dragged_outside

*   [We hurried home] -> hurry_outside


=== hurry_outside ===
We hurried home to Savile Row -> as_fast_as_we_could


=== dragged_outside ===
He insisted that we hurried home to Savile Row
-> as_fast_as_we_could


=== as_fast_as_we_could ===
<> as fast as we could.
@end verbatim

@node The story flow
@subsection The story flow
@anchor{#the-story-flow}
Knots and diverts combine to create the basic story flow of the game.
This flow is "flat" - there's no call-stack, and diverts aren't
"returned" from.

In most ink scripts, the story flow starts at the top, bounces around in
a spaghetti-like mess, and eventually, hopefully, reaches a
@code{-> END}.

The very loose structure means writers can get on and write, branching
and rejoining without worrying about the structure that they're creating
as they go. There's no boiler-plate to creating new branches or
diversions, and no need to track any state.

@menu
* Advanced Loops::
@end menu

@node Advanced Loops
@subsubsection Advanced: Loops
@anchor{#advanced-loops}
You absolutely can use diverts to create looped content, and
@strong{ink} has several features to exploit this, including ways to
make the content vary itself, and ways to control how often options can
be chosen.

See the sections on @ref{#8-variable-text,Varying Text} and
@ref{#conditional-choices,Conditional Choices} for more information.

Oh, and the following is legal and not a great idea:

@verbatim
=== round ===
and
-> round
@end verbatim

@node 6 Includes and Stitches
@section 6) Includes and Stitches
@anchor{#6-includes-and-stitches}

@menu
* Knots can be subdivided::
* Stitches have unique names::
* The first stitch is the default::
* Local diverts::
* Script files can be combined::
@end menu

@node Knots can be subdivided
@subsection Knots can be subdivided
@anchor{#knots-can-be-subdivided}
As stories get longer, they become more confusing to keep organised
without some additional structure.

Knots can include sub-sections called "stitches". These are marked using
a single equals sign.

@verbatim
=== the_orient_express ===
= in_first_class
    ...
= in_third_class
    ...
= in_the_guards_van
    ...
= missed_the_train
    ...
@end verbatim

One could use a knot for a scene, for instance, and stitches for the
events within the scene.

@node Stitches have unique names
@subsection Stitches have unique names
@anchor{#stitches-have-unique-names}
A stitch can be diverted to using its "address".

@verbatim
*   [Travel in third class]
    -> the_orient_express.in_third_class

*   [Travel in the guard's van]
    -> the_orient_express.in_the_guards_van
@end verbatim

@node The first stitch is the default
@subsection The first stitch is the default
@anchor{#the-first-stitch-is-the-default}
Diverting to a knot which contains stitches will divert to the first
stitch in the knot. So:

@verbatim
*   [Travel in first class]
    "First class, Monsieur. Where else?"
    -> the_orient_express
@end verbatim

is the same as:

@verbatim
*   [Travel in first class]
    "First class, Monsieur. Where else?"
    -> the_orient_express.in_first_class
@end verbatim

(...unless we move the order of the stitches around inside the knot!)

You can also include content at the top of a knot outside of any stitch.
However, you need to remember to divert out of it - the engine
@emph{won't} automatically enter the first stitch once it's worked its
way through the header content.

@verbatim
=== the_orient_express ===

We boarded the train, but where?
*   [First class] -> in_first_class
*   [Second class] -> in_second_class

= in_first_class
    ...
= in_second_class
    ...
@end verbatim

@node Local diverts
@subsection Local diverts
@anchor{#local-diverts}
From inside a knot, you don't need to use the full address for a stitch.

@verbatim
-> the_orient_express

=== the_orient_express ===
= in_first_class
    I settled my master.
    *   [Move to third class]
        -> in_third_class

= in_third_class
    I put myself in third.
@end verbatim

This means stitches and knots can't share names, but several knots can
contain the same stitch name. (So both the Orient Express and the SS
Mongolia can have first class.)

The compiler will warn you if ambiguous names are used.

@node Script files can be combined
@subsection Script files can be combined
@anchor{#script-files-can-be-combined}
You can also split your content across multiple files, using an include
statement.

@verbatim
INCLUDE newspaper.ink
INCLUDE cities/vienna.ink
INCLUDE journeys/orient_express.ink
@end verbatim

Include statements should always go at the top of a file, and not inside
knots.

There are no rules about what file a knot must be in to be diverted to.
(In other words, separating files has no effect on the game's
namespacing).

@node 7 Varying Choices
@section 7) Varying Choices
@anchor{#7-varying-choices}

@menu
* Choices can only be used once::
* Sticky choices::
* Conditional Choices::
@end menu

@node Choices can only be used once
@subsection Choices can only be used once
@anchor{#choices-can-only-be-used-once}
By default, every choice in the game can only be chosen once. If you
don't have loops in your story, you'll never notice this behaviour. But
if you do use loops, you'll quickly notice your options disappearing...

@verbatim
=== find_help ===

    You search desperately for a friendly face in the crowd.
    *   The woman in the hat[?] pushes you roughly aside. -> find_help
    *   The man with the briefcase[?] looks disgusted as you stumble past him. -> find_help
@end verbatim

produces:

@verbatim
You search desperately for a friendly face in the crowd.

1: The woman in the hat?
2: The man with the briefcase?

> 1
The woman in the hat pushes you roughly aside.
You search desperately for a friendly face in the crowd.

1: The man with the briefcase?

>
@end verbatim

... and on the next loop you'll have no options left.

@menu
* Fallback choices::
* Example of a fallback choice::
@end menu

@node Fallback choices
@subsubsection Fallback choices
@anchor{#fallback-choices}
The above example stops where it does, because the next choice ends up
in an "out of content" run-time error.

@verbatim
> 1
The man with the briefcase looks disgusted as you stumble past him.
You search desperately for a friendly face in the crowd.

Runtime error in tests/test.ink line 6: ran out of content. Do you need a '-> DONE' or '-> END'?
@end verbatim

We can resolve this with a 'fallback choice'. Fallback choices are never
displayed to the player, but are 'chosen' by the game if no other
options exist.

A fallback choice is simply a "choice without choice text":

@verbatim
*   -> out_of_options
@end verbatim

And, in a slight abuse of syntax, we can make a default choice with
content in it, using an "choice then arrow":

@verbatim
*   ->
    Mulder never could explain how he got out of that burning box car. -> season_2
@end verbatim

@node Example of a fallback choice
@subsubsection Example of a fallback choice
@anchor{#example-of-a-fallback-choice}
Adding this into the previous example gives us:

@verbatim
=== find_help ===

    You search desperately for a friendly face in the crowd.
    *   The woman in the hat[?] pushes you roughly aside. -> find_help
    *   The man with the briefcase[?] looks disgusted as you stumble past him. -> find_help
    *   ->
        But it is too late: you collapse onto the station platform. This is the end.
        -> END
@end verbatim

and produces:

@verbatim
You search desperately for a friendly face in the crowd.

1: The woman in the hat?
2: The man with the briefcase?

> 1
The woman in the hat pushes you roughly aside.
You search desperately for a friendly face in the crowd.

1: The man with the briefcase?

> 1
The man with the briefcase looks disgusted as you stumble past him.
You search desperately for a friendly face in the crowd.
But it is too late: you collapse onto the station platform. This is the end.
@end verbatim

@node Sticky choices
@subsection Sticky choices
@anchor{#sticky-choices}
The 'once-only' behaviour is not always what we want, of course, so we
have a second kind of choice: the "sticky" choice. A sticky choice is
simply one that doesn't get used up, and is marked by a @code{+} bullet.

@verbatim
=== homers_couch ===
    +   [Eat another donut]
        You eat another donut. -> homers_couch
    *   [Get off the couch]
        You struggle up off the couch to go and compose epic poetry.
        -> END
@end verbatim

Fallback choices can be sticky too.

@verbatim
=== conversation_loop
    *   [Talk about the weather] -> chat_weather
    *   [Talk about the children] -> chat_children
    +   -> sit_in_silence_again
@end verbatim

@node Conditional Choices
@subsection Conditional Choices
@anchor{#conditional-choices}
You can also turn choices on and off by hand. @strong{ink} has quite a
lot of logic available, but the simplest tests is "has the player seen a
particular piece of content".

Every knot/stitch in the game has a unique address (so it can be
diverted to), and we use the same address to test if that piece of
content has been seen.

@verbatim
*   { not visit_paris }     [Go to Paris] -> visit_paris
+   { visit_paris    }      [Return to Paris] -> visit_paris

*   { visit_paris.met_estelle } [ Telephone Mme Estelle ] -> phone_estelle
@end verbatim

Note that the test @code{knot_name} is true if @emph{any} stitch inside
that knot has been seen.

Note also that conditionals don't override the once-only behaviour of
options, so you'll still need sticky options for repeatable choices.

@menu
* Advanced multiple conditions::
* Logical operators AND and OR::
* Advanced knot/stitch labels are actually read counts::
* Advanced more logic::
@end menu

@node Advanced multiple conditions
@subsubsection Advanced: multiple conditions
@anchor{#advanced-multiple-conditions}
You can use several logical tests on an option; if you do, @emph{all}
the tests must all be passed for the option to appear.

@verbatim
*   { not visit_paris }     [Go to Paris] -> visit_paris
+   { visit_paris } { not bored_of_paris }
    [Return to Paris] -> visit_paris
@end verbatim

@node Logical operators AND and OR
@subsubsection Logical operators: AND and OR
@anchor{#logical-operators-and-and-or}
The above "multiple conditions" are really just conditions with an the
usual programming AND operator. Ink supports @code{and} (also written as
@code{&&}) and @code{or} (also written as @code{||}) in the usual way,
as well as brackets.

@verbatim
*   { not (visit_paris or visit_rome) && (visit_london || visit_new_york) } [ Wait. Go where? I'm confused. ] -> visit_someplace
@end verbatim

For non-programmers @code{X and Y} means both X and Y must be true.
@code{X or Y} means either or both. We don't have a @code{xor}.

You can also use the standard @code{!} for @code{not}, though it'll
sometimes confuse the compiler which thinks @code{@{!text@}} is a
once-only list. We recommend using @code{not} because negated boolean
tests are never that exciting.

@node Advanced knot/stitch labels are actually read counts
@subsubsection Advanced: knot/stitch labels are actually read counts
@anchor{#advanced-knotstitch-labels-are-actually-read-counts}
The test:

@verbatim
*   {seen_clue} [Accuse Mr Jefferson]
@end verbatim

is actually testing an @emph{integer} and not a true/false flag. A knot
or stitch used this way is actually an integer variable containing the
number of times the content at the address has been seen by the player.

If it's non-zero, it'll return true in a test like the one above, but
you can also be more specific as well:

@verbatim
* {seen_clue > 3} [Flat-out arrest Mr Jefferson]
@end verbatim

@node Advanced more logic
@subsubsection Advanced: more logic
@anchor{#advanced-more-logic}
@strong{ink} supports a lot more logic and conditionality than covered
here - see the section on @ref{#part-3-variables-and-logic,variables and
logic}.

@node 8 Variable Text
@section 8) Variable Text
@anchor{#8-variable-text}

@menu
* Text can vary::
* Sequences cycles and other alternatives::
* Conditional Text::
@end menu

@node Text can vary
@subsection Text can vary
@anchor{#text-can-vary}
So far, all the content we've seen has been static, fixed pieces of
text. But content can also vary at the moment of being printed.

@node Sequences cycles and other alternatives
@subsection Sequences, cycles and other alternatives
@anchor{#sequences-cycles-and-other-alternatives}
The simplest variations of text are provided by alternatives, which are
selected from depending on some kind of rule. @strong{ink} supports
several types. Alternatives are written inside @code{@{}...@code{@}}
curly brackets, with elements separated by @code{|} symbols (vertical
divider lines).

These are only useful if a piece of content is visited more than once!

@menu
* Types of alternatives::
* Features of Alternatives::
* Examples::
* Sneak Preview Multiline alternatives::
@end menu

@node Types of alternatives
@subsubsection Types of alternatives
@anchor{#types-of-alternatives}
@strong{Sequences} (the default):

A sequence (or a "stopping block") is a set of alternatives that tracks
how many times its been seen, and each time, shows the next element
along. When it runs out of new content it continues the show the final
element.

@verbatim
The radio hissed into life. {"Three!"|"Two!"|"One!"|There was the white noise racket of an explosion.|But it was just static.}

{I bought a coffee with my five-pound note.|I bought a second coffee for my friend.|I didn't have enough money to buy any more coffee.}
@end verbatim

@strong{Cycles} (marked with a @code{&}):

Cycles are like sequences, but they loop their content.

@verbatim
It was {&Monday|Tuesday|Wednesday|Thursday|Friday|Saturday|Sunday} today.
@end verbatim

@strong{Once-only} (marked with a @code{!}):

Once-only alternatives are like sequences, but when they run out of new
content to display, they display nothing. (You can think of a once-only
alternative as a sequence with a blank last entry.)

@verbatim
He told me a joke. {!I laughed politely.|I smiled.|I grimaced.|I promised myself to not react again.}
@end verbatim

@strong{Shuffles} (marked with a @code{~}):

Shuffles produce randomised output.

@verbatim
I tossed the coin. {~Heads|Tails}.
@end verbatim

@node Features of Alternatives
@subsubsection Features of Alternatives
@anchor{#features-of-alternatives}
Alternatives can contain blank elements.

@verbatim
I took a step forward. {!||||Then the lights went out. -> eek}
@end verbatim

Alternatives can be nested.

@verbatim
The Ratbear {&{wastes no time and |}swipes|scratches} {&at you|into your {&leg|arm|cheek}}.
@end verbatim

Alternatives can include divert statements.

@verbatim
I {waited.|waited some more.|snoozed.|woke up and waited more.|gave up and left. -> leave_post_office}
@end verbatim

They can also be used inside choice text:

@verbatim
+   "Hello, {&Master|Monsieur Fogg|you|brown-eyes}!"[] I declared.
@end verbatim

(...with one caveat; you can't start an option's text with a @code{@{},
as it'll look like a conditional.)

(...but the caveat has a caveat, if you escape a whitespace @code{\ }
before your @code{@{} ink will recognise it as text.)

@verbatim
+\  {&They headed towards the Sandlands|They set off for the desert|The party followed the old road South}
@end verbatim

@node Examples
@subsubsection Examples
@anchor{#examples}
Alternatives can be used inside loops to create the appearance of
intelligent, state-tracking gameplay without particular effort.

Here's a one-knot version of whack-a-mole. Note we use once-only
options, and a fallback, to ensure the mole doesn't move around, and the
game will always end.

@verbatim
=== whack_a_mole ===
    {I heft the hammer.|{~Missed!|Nothing!|No good. Where is he?|Ah-ha! Got him! -> END}}
    The {&mole|{&nasty|blasted|foul} {&creature|rodent}} is {in here somewhere|hiding somewhere|still at large|laughing at me|still unwhacked|doomed}. <>
    {!I'll show him!|But this time he won't escape!}
    *   [{&Hit|Smash|Try} top-left]     -> whack_a_mole
    *  [{&Whallop|Splat|Whack} top-right] -> whack_a_mole
    *  [{&Blast|Hammer} middle] -> whack_a_mole
    *  [{&Clobber|Bosh} bottom-left]    -> whack_a_mole
    *  [{&Nail|Thump} bottom-right]     -> whack_a_mole
    *   ->
            Then you collapse from hunger. The mole has defeated you!
            -> END
@end verbatim

produces the following 'game':

@verbatim
I heft the hammer.
The mole is in here somewhere. I'll show him!

1: Hit top-left
2: Whallop top-right
3: Blast middle
4: Clobber bottom-left
5: Nail bottom-right

> 1
Missed!
The nasty creature is hiding somewhere. But this time he won't escape!

1: Splat top-right
2: Hammer middle
3: Bosh bottom-left
4: Thump bottom-right

> 4
Nothing!
The mole is still at large.
1: Whack top-right
2: Blast middle
3: Clobber bottom-left

> 2
Where is he?
The blasted rodent is laughing at me.
1: Whallop top-right
2: Bosh bottom-left

> 1
Ah-ha! Got him!
@end verbatim

And here's a bit of lifestyle advice. Note the sticky choice - the lure
of the television will never fade:

@verbatim
=== turn_on_television ===
I turned on the television {for the first time|for the second time|again|once more}, but there was {nothing good on, so I turned it off again|still nothing worth watching|even less to hold my interest than before|nothing but rubbish|a program about sharks and I don't like sharks|nothing on}.
+   [Try it again]          -> turn_on_television
*   [Go outside instead]    -> go_outside_instead

=== go_outside_instead ===
-> END
@end verbatim

@node Sneak Preview Multiline alternatives
@subsubsection Sneak Preview: Multiline alternatives
@anchor{#sneak-preview-multiline-alternatives}
@strong{ink} has another format for making alternatives of varying
content blocks, too. See the section on @ref{#multiline-blocks,multiline
blocks} for details.

@node Conditional Text
@subsection Conditional Text
@anchor{#conditional-text}
Text can also vary depending on logical tests, just as options can.

@verbatim
{met_blofeld: "I saw him. Only for a moment." }
@end verbatim

and

@verbatim
"His real name was {met_blofeld.learned_his_name: Franz|a secret}."
@end verbatim

These can appear as separate lines, or within a section of content. They
can even be nested, so:

@verbatim
{met_blofeld: "I saw him. Only for a moment. His real name was {met_blofeld.learned_his_name: Franz|kept a secret}." | "I missed him. Was he particularly evil?" }
@end verbatim

can produce either:

@verbatim
"I saw him. Only for a moment. His real name was Franz."
@end verbatim

or:

@verbatim
"I saw him. Only for a moment. His real name was kept a secret."
@end verbatim

or:

@verbatim
"I missed him. Was he particularly evil?"
@end verbatim

@node 9 Game Queries and Functions
@section 9) Game Queries and Functions
@anchor{#9-game-queries-and-functions}
@strong{ink} provides a few useful 'game level' queries about game
state, for use in conditional logic. They're not quite parts of the
language, but they're always available, and they can't be edited by the
author. In a sense, they're the "standard library functions" of the
language.

The convention is to name these in capital letters.

@menu
* CHOICE_COUNT::
* TURNS::
* TURNS_SINCE-> knot::
* SEED_RANDOM::
@end menu

@node CHOICE_COUNT
@subsection CHOICE_COUNT()
@anchor{#choice_count}
@code{CHOICE_COUNT} returns the number of options created so far in the
current chunk. So for instance.

@verbatim
*   {false} Option A
*   {true} Option B
*  {CHOICE_COUNT() == 1} Option C
@end verbatim

produces two options, B and C. This can be useful for controlling how
many options a player gets on a turn.

@node TURNS
@subsection TURNS()
@anchor{#turns}
This returns the number of game turns since the game began.

@node TURNS_SINCE-> knot
@subsection TURNS_SINCE(-> knot)
@anchor{#turns_since--knot}
@code{TURNS_SINCE} returns the number of moves (formally, player inputs)
since a particular knot/stitch was last visited.

A value of 0 means "was seen as part of the current chunk". A value of
-1 means "has never been seen". Any other positive value means it has
been seen that many turns ago.

@verbatim
*   {TURNS_SINCE(-> sleeping.intro) > 10} You are feeling tired... -> sleeping
*   {TURNS_SINCE(-> laugh) == 0}  You try to stop laughing.
@end verbatim

Note that the parameter passed to @code{TURNS_SINCE} is a "divert
target", not simply the knot address itself (because the knot address is
a number - the read count - not a location in the story...)

TODO: (requirement of passing @code{-c} to the compiler)

@menu
* Sneak preview using TURNS_SINCE in a function::
@end menu

@node Sneak preview using TURNS_SINCE in a function
@subsubsection Sneak preview: using TURNS_SINCE in a function
@anchor{#sneak-preview-using-turns_since-in-a-function}
The @code{TURNS_SINCE(->x) == 0} test is so useful it's often worth
wrapping it up as an ink function.

@verbatim
=== function came_from(-> x)
    ~ return TURNS_SINCE(x) == 0
@end verbatim

The section on @ref{#5-functions,functions} outlines the syntax here a
bit more clearly but the above allows you to say things like:

@verbatim
* {came_from(->  nice_welcome)} 'I'm happy to be here!'
* {came_from(->  nasty_welcome)} 'Let's keep this quick.'
@end verbatim

... and have the game react to content the player saw @emph{just now}.

@node SEED_RANDOM
@subsection SEED_RANDOM()
@anchor{#seed_random}
For testing purposes, it's often useful to fix the random number
generator so ink will produce the same outcomes every time you play. You
can do this by "seeding" the random number system.

@verbatim
~ SEED_RANDOM(235)
@end verbatim

The number you pass to the seed function is arbitrary, but providing
different seeds will result in different sequences of outcomes.

@menu
* Advanced more queries::
@end menu

@node Advanced more queries
@subsubsection Advanced: more queries
@anchor{#advanced-more-queries}
You can make your own external functions, though the syntax is a bit
different: see the section on @ref{#5-functions,functions} below.

@node Part 2 Weave
@chapter Part 2: Weave
@anchor{#part-2-weave}
So far, we've been building branched stories in the simplest way, with
"options" that link to "pages".

But this requires us to uniquely name every destination in the story,
which can slow down writing and discourage minor branching.

@strong{ink} has a much more powerful syntax available, designed for
simplifying story flows which have an always-forwards direction (as most
stories do, and most computer programs don't).

This format is called "weave", and its built out of the basic
content/option syntax with two new features: the gather mark, @code{-},
and the nesting of choices and gathers.

@menu
* 1 Gathers::
* 2 Nested Flow::
* 3 Tracking a Weave::
@end menu

@node 1 Gathers
@section 1) Gathers
@anchor{#1-gathers}

@menu
* Gather points gather the flow back together::
* Options and gathers form chains of content::
@end menu

@node Gather points gather the flow back together
@subsection Gather points gather the flow back together
@anchor{#gather-points-gather-the-flow-back-together}
Let's go back to the first multi-choice example at the top of this
document.

@verbatim
"What's that?" my master asked.
    *   "I am somewhat tired[."]," I repeated.
        "Really," he responded. "How deleterious."
    *   "Nothing, Monsieur!"[] I replied.
    *  "I said, this journey is appalling[."] and I want no more of it."
        "Ah," he replied, not unkindly. "I see you are feeling frustrated. Tomorrow, things will improve."
@end verbatim

In a real game, all three of these options might well lead to the same
conclusion - Monsieur Fogg leaves the room. We can do this using a
gather, without the need to create any new knots, or add any diverts.

@verbatim
"What's that?" my master asked.
    *   "I am somewhat tired[."]," I repeated.
        "Really," he responded. "How deleterious."
    *   "Nothing, Monsieur!"[] I replied.
        "Very good, then."
    *  "I said, this journey is appalling[."] and I want no more of it."
    "Ah," he replied, not unkindly. "I see you are feeling frustrated. Tomorrow, things will improve."

-   With that Monsieur Fogg left the room.
@end verbatim

This produces the following playthrough:

@verbatim
"What's that?" my master asked.

1: "I am somewhat tired."
2: "Nothing, Monsieur!"
3: "I said, this journey is appalling."

> 1
"I am somewhat tired," I repeated.
"Really," he responded. "How deleterious."
With that Monsieur Fogg left the room.
@end verbatim

@node Options and gathers form chains of content
@subsection Options and gathers form chains of content
@anchor{#options-and-gathers-form-chains-of-content}
We can string these gather-and-branch sections together to make branchy
sequences that always run forwards.

@verbatim
=== escape ===
I ran through the forest, the dogs snapping at my heels.

    *   I checked the jewels[] were still in my pocket, and the feel of them brought a spring to my step. <>

    *  I did not pause for breath[] but kept on running. <>

    *   I cheered with joy. <>

-   The road could not be much further! Mackie would have the engine running, and then I'd be safe.

    *   I reached the road and looked about[]. And would you believe it?
    *   I should interrupt to say Mackie is normally very reliable[]. He's never once let me down. Or rather, never once, previously to that night.

-   The road was empty. Mackie was nowhere to be seen.
@end verbatim

This is the most basic kind of weave. The rest of this section details
additional features that allow weaves to nest, contain side-tracks and
diversions, divert within themselves, and above all, reference earlier
choices to influence later ones.

@menu
* The weave philosophy::
@end menu

@node The weave philosophy
@subsubsection The weave philosophy
@anchor{#the-weave-philosophy}
Weaves are more than just a convenient encapsulation of branching flow;
they're also a way to author more robust content. The @code{escape}
example above has already four possible routes through, and a more
complex sequence might have lots and lots more. Using normal diverts,
one has to check the links by chasing the diverts from point to point
and it's easy for errors to creep in.

With a weave, the flow is guaranteed to start at the top and "fall" to
the bottom. Flow errors are impossible in a basic weave structure, and
the output text can be easily skim read. That means there's no need to
actually test all the branches in game to be sure they work as intended.

Weaves also allow for easy redrafting of choice-points; in particular,
it's easy to break a sentence up and insert additional choices for
variety or pacing reasons, without having to re-engineer any flow.

@node 2 Nested Flow
@section 2) Nested Flow
@anchor{#2-nested-flow}
The weaves shown above are quite simple, "flat" structures. Whatever the
player does, they take the same number of turns to get from top to
bottom. However, sometimes certain choices warrant a bit more depth or
complexity.

For that, we allow weaves to nest.

This section comes with a warning. Nested weaves are very powerful and
very compact, but they can take a bit of getting used to!

@menu
* Options can be nested::
* Gather points can be nested too::
* You can nest as many levels are you like::
* Example a conversation with nested nodes::
@end menu

@node Options can be nested
@subsection Options can be nested
@anchor{#options-can-be-nested}
Consider the following scene:

@verbatim
-   "Well, Poirot? Murder or suicide?"
*   "Murder!"
*   "Suicide!"
-   Ms. Christie lowered her manuscript a moment. The rest of the writing group sat, open-mouthed.
@end verbatim

The first choice presented is "Murder!" or "Suicide!". If Poirot
declares a suicide, there's no more to do, but in the case of murder,
there's a follow-up question needed - who does he suspect?

We can add new options via a set of nested sub-choices. We tell the
script that these new choices are "part of" another choice by using two
asterisks, instead of just one.

@verbatim
-   "Well, Poirot? Murder or suicide?"
    *   "Murder!"
        "And who did it?"
        * *     "Detective-Inspector Japp!"
        * *     "Captain Hastings!"
        * *     "Myself!"
    *   "Suicide!"
    -   Mrs. Christie lowered her manuscript a moment. The rest of the writing group sat, open-mouthed.
@end verbatim

(Note that it's good style to also indent the lines to show the nesting,
but the compiler doesn't mind.)

And should we want to add new sub-options to the other route, we do that
in similar fashion.

@verbatim
-   "Well, Poirot? Murder or suicide?"
    *   "Murder!"
        "And who did it?"
        * *     "Detective-Inspector Japp!"
        * *     "Captain Hastings!"
        * *     "Myself!"
    *   "Suicide!"
        "Really, Poirot? Are you quite sure?"
        * *     "Quite sure."
        * *     "It is perfectly obvious."
    -   Mrs. Christie lowered her manuscript a moment. The rest of the writing group sat, open-mouthed.
@end verbatim

Now, that initial choice of accusation will lead to specific follow-up
questions - but either way, the flow will come back together at the
gather point, for Mrs. Christie's cameo appearance.

But what if we want a more extended sub-scene?

@node Gather points can be nested too
@subsection Gather points can be nested too
@anchor{#gather-points-can-be-nested-too}
Sometimes, it's not a question of expanding the number of options, but
having more than one additional beat of story. We can do this by nesting
gather points as well as options.

@verbatim
-   "Well, Poirot? Murder or suicide?"
        *   "Murder!"
            "And who did it?"
            * *     "Detective-Inspector Japp!"
            * *     "Captain Hastings!"
            * *     "Myself!"
            - -     "You must be joking!"
            * *     "Mon ami, I am deadly serious."
            * *     "If only..."
        *   "Suicide!"
            "Really, Poirot? Are you quite sure?"
            * *     "Quite sure."
            * *     "It is perfectly obvious."
        -   Mrs. Christie lowered her manuscript a moment. The rest of the writing group sat, open-mouthed.
@end verbatim

If the player chooses the "murder" option, they'll have two choices in a
row on their sub-branch - a whole flat weave, just for them.

@menu
* Advanced What gathers do::
@end menu

@node Advanced What gathers do
@subsubsection Advanced: What gathers do
@anchor{#advanced-what-gathers-do}
Gathers are hopefully intuitive, but their behaviour is a little harder
to put into words: in general, after an option has been taken, the story
finds the next gather down that isn't on a lower level, and diverts to
it.

The basic idea is this: options separate the paths of the story, and
gathers bring them back together. (Hence the name, "weave"!)

@node You can nest as many levels are you like
@subsection You can nest as many levels are you like
@anchor{#you-can-nest-as-many-levels-are-you-like}
Above, we used two levels of nesting; the main flow, and the sub-flow.
But there's no limit to how many levels deep you can go.

@verbatim
-   "Tell us a tale, Captain!"
    *   "Very well, you sea-dogs. Here's a tale..."
        * *     "It was a dark and stormy night..."
                * * *   "...and the crew were restless..."
                        * * * *  "... and they said to their Captain..."
                                * * * * *       "...Tell us a tale Captain!"
    *   "No, it's past your bed-time."
-   To a man, the crew began to yawn.
@end verbatim

After a while, this sub-nesting gets hard to read and manipulate, so
it's good style to divert away to a new stitch if a side-choice goes
unwieldy.

But, in theory at least, you could write your entire story as a single
weave.

@node Example a conversation with nested nodes
@subsection Example: a conversation with nested nodes
@anchor{#example-a-conversation-with-nested-nodes}
Here's a longer example:

@verbatim
- I looked at Monsieur Fogg
*   ... and I could contain myself no longer.
    'What is the purpose of our journey, Monsieur?'
    'A wager,' he replied.
    * *     'A wager!'[] I returned.
            He nodded.
            * * *   'But surely that is foolishness!'
            * * *  'A most serious matter then!'
            - - -   He nodded again.
            * * *   'But can we win?'
                    'That is what we will endeavour to find out,' he answered.
            * * *   'A modest wager, I trust?'
                    'Twenty thousand pounds,' he replied, quite flatly.
            * * *   I asked nothing further of him then[.], and after a final, polite cough, he offered nothing more to me. <>
    * *     'Ah[.'],' I replied, uncertain what I thought.
    - -     After that, <>
*   ... but I said nothing[] and <>
- we passed the day in silence.
- -> END
@end verbatim

with a couple of possible playthroughs. A short one:

@verbatim
I looked at Monsieur Fogg

1: ... and I could contain myself no longer.
2: ... but I said nothing

> 2
... but I said nothing and we passed the day in silence.
@end verbatim

and a longer one:

@verbatim
I looked at Monsieur Fogg

1: ... and I could contain myself no longer.
2: ... but I said nothing

> 1
... and I could contain myself no longer.
'What is the purpose of our journey, Monsieur?'
'A wager,' he replied.

1: 'A wager!'
2: 'Ah.'

> 1
'A wager!' I returned.
He nodded.

1: 'But surely that is foolishness!'
2: 'A most serious matter then!'

> 2
'A most serious matter then!'
He nodded again.

1: 'But can we win?'
2: 'A modest wager, I trust?'
3: I asked nothing further of him then.

> 2
'A modest wager, I trust?'
'Twenty thousand pounds,' he replied, quite flatly.
After that, we passed the day in silence.
@end verbatim

Hopefully, this demonstrates the philosophy laid out above: that weaves
offer a compact way to offer a lot of branching, a lot of choices, but
with the guarantee of getting from beginning to end!

@node 3 Tracking a Weave
@section 3) Tracking a Weave
@anchor{#3-tracking-a-weave}
Sometimes, the weave structure is sufficient. But when it's not, we need
a bit more control.

@menu
* Weaves are largely unaddressed::
* Gathers and options can be labelled::
* Scope::
@end menu

@node Weaves are largely unaddressed
@subsection Weaves are largely unaddressed
@anchor{#weaves-are-largely-unaddressed}
By default, lines of content in a weave don't have an address or label,
which means they can't be diverted to, and they can't be tested for. In
the most basic weave structure, choices vary the path the player takes
through the weave and what they see, but once the weave is finished
those choices and that path are forgotten.

But should we want to remember what the player has seen, we can - we add
in labels where they're needed using the @code{(label_name)} syntax.

@node Gathers and options can be labelled
@subsection Gathers and options can be labelled
@anchor{#gathers-and-options-can-be-labelled}
Gather points at any nested level can be labelled using brackets.

@verbatim
-  (top)
@end verbatim

Once labelled, gather points can be diverted to, or tested for in
conditionals, just like knots and stitches. This means you can use
previous decisions to alter later outcomes inside the weave, while still
keeping all the advantages of a clear, reliable forward-flow.

Options can also be labelled, just like gather points, using brackets.
Label brackets come before conditions in the line.

These addresses can be used in conditional tests, which can be useful
for creating options unlocked by other options.

@verbatim
=== meet_guard ===
The guard frowns at you.

*   (greet) [Greet him]
    'Greetings.'
*   (get_out) 'Get out of my way[.'],' you tell the guard.

-   'Hmm,' replies the guard.

*   {greet}     'Having a nice day?' // only if you greeted him

*   'Hmm?'[] you reply.

*   {get_out} [Shove him aside]      // only if you threatened him
    You shove him sharply. He stares in reply, and draws his sword!
    -> fight_guard          // this route diverts out of the weave

-   'Mff,' the guard replies, and then offers you a paper bag. 'Toffee?'
@end verbatim

@node Scope
@subsection Scope
@anchor{#scope}
Inside the same block of weave, you can simply use the label name; from
outside the block you need a path, either to a different stitch within
the same knot:

@verbatim
=== knot ===
= stitch_one
    - (gatherpoint) Some content.
= stitch_two
    *   {stitch_one.gatherpoint} Option
@end verbatim

or pointing into another knot:

@verbatim
=== knot_one ===
-   (gather_one)
    * {knot_two.stitch_two.gather_two} Option

=== knot_two ===
= stitch_two
    - (gather_two)
        *   {knot_one.gather_one} Option
@end verbatim

@menu
* Advanced all options can be labelled::
* Advanced Loops in a weave::
* Advanced diverting to options::
* Advanced Gathers directly after an option::
@end menu

@node Advanced all options can be labelled
@subsubsection Advanced: all options can be labelled
@anchor{#advanced-all-options-can-be-labelled}
In truth, all content in ink is a weave, even if there are no gathers in
sight. That means you can label @emph{any} option in the game with a
bracket label, and then reference it using the addressing syntax. In
particular, this means you can test @emph{which} option a player took to
reach a particular outcome.

@verbatim
=== fight_guard ===
...
= throw_something
*   (rock) [Throw rock at guard] -> throw
*   (sand) [Throw sand at guard] -> throw

= throw
You hurl {throw_something.rock:a rock|a handful of sand} at the guard.
@end verbatim

@node Advanced Loops in a weave
@subsubsection Advanced: Loops in a weave
@anchor{#advanced-loops-in-a-weave}
Labelling allows us to create loops inside weaves. Here's a standard
pattern for asking questions of an NPC.

@verbatim
- (opts)
    *   'Can I get a uniform from somewhere?'[] you ask the cheerful guard.
        'Sure. In the locker.' He grins. 'Don't think it'll fit you, though.'
    *   'Tell me about the security system.'
        'It's ancient,' the guard assures you. 'Old as coal.'
    *   'Are there dogs?'
        'Hundreds,' the guard answers, with a toothy grin. 'Hungry devils, too.'
    // We require the player to ask at least one question
    *   {loop} [Enough talking]
        -> done
- (loop)
    // loop a few times before the guard gets bored
    { -> opts | -> opts | }
    He scratches his head.
    'Well, can't stand around talking all day,' he declares.
- (done)
    You thank the guard, and move away.
@end verbatim

@node Advanced diverting to options
@subsubsection Advanced: diverting to options
@anchor{#advanced-diverting-to-options}
Options can also be diverted to: but the divert goes to the output of
having chosen that choice, @emph{as though the choice had been chosen}.
So the content printed will ignore square bracketed text, and if the
option is once-only, it will be marked as used up.

@verbatim
- (opts)
*   [Pull a face]
    You pull a face, and the soldier comes at you! -> shove

*   (shove) [Shove the guard aside] You shove the guard to one side, but he comes back swinging.

*   {shove} [Grapple and fight] -> fight_the_guard

-   -> opts
@end verbatim

produces:

@verbatim
1: Pull a face
2: Shove the guard aside

> 1
You pull a face, and the soldier comes at you! You shove the guard to one side, but he comes back swinging.

1: Grapple and fight

>
@end verbatim

@node Advanced Gathers directly after an option
@subsubsection Advanced: Gathers directly after an option
@anchor{#advanced-gathers-directly-after-an-option}
The following is valid, and frequently useful.

@verbatim
*   "Are you quite well, Monsieur?"[] I asked.
    - - (quitewell) "Quite well," he replied.
*   "How did you do at the crossword, Monsieur?"[] I asked.
    -> quitewell
*   I said nothing[] and neither did my Master.
-   We fell into companionable silence once more.
@end verbatim

Note the level 2 gather point directly below the first option: there's
nothing to gather here, really, but it gives us a handy place to divert
the second option to.

@node Part 3 Variables and Logic
@chapter Part 3: Variables and Logic
@anchor{#part-3-variables-and-logic}
So far we've made conditional text, and conditional choices, using tests
based on what content the player has seen so far.

@strong{ink} also supports variables, both temporary and global, storing
numerical and content data, or even story flow commands. It is
fully-featured in terms of logic, and contains a few additional
structures to help keep the often complex logic of a branching story
better organised.

@menu
* 1 Global Variables::
* 2 Logic::
* 3 Conditional blocks if/else::
* 4 Temporary Variables::
* 5 Functions::
* 6 Constants::
* 7 Advanced Game-side logic::
@end menu

@node 1 Global Variables
@section 1) Global Variables
@anchor{#1-global-variables}
The most powerful kind of variable, and arguably the most useful for a
story, is a variable to store some unique property about the state of
the game - anything from the amount of money in the protagonist's
pocket, to a value representing the protagonist's state of mind.

This kind of variable is called "global" because it can be accessed from
anywhere in the story - both set, and read from. (Traditionally,
programming tries to avoid this kind of thing, as it allows one part of
a program to mess with another, unrelated part. But a story is a story,
and stories are all about consequences: what happens in Vegas rarely
stays there.)

@menu
* Defining Global Variables::
* Using Global Variables::
* Printing variables::
* Evaluating strings::
@end menu

@node Defining Global Variables
@subsection Defining Global Variables
@anchor{#defining-global-variables}
Global variables can be defined anywhere, via a @code{VAR} statement.
They should be given an initial value, which defines what type of
variable they are - integer, floating point (decimal), content, or a
story address.

@verbatim
VAR knowledge_of_the_cure = false
VAR players_name = "Emilia"
VAR number_of_infected_people = 521
VAR current_epilogue = -> they_all_die_of_the_plague
@end verbatim

@node Using Global Variables
@subsection Using Global Variables
@anchor{#using-global-variables}
We can test global variables to control options, and provide conditional
text, in a similar way to what we have previously seen.

@verbatim
=== the_train ===
    The train jolted and rattled. { mood > 0:I was feeling positive enough, however, and did not mind the odd bump|It was more than I could bear}.
    *   { not knows_about_wager } 'But, Monsieur, why are we travelling?'[] I asked.
    *   { knows_about_wager} I contemplated our strange adventure[]. Would it be possible?
@end verbatim

@menu
* Advanced storing diverts as variables::
* Advanced Global variables are externally visible::
@end menu

@node Advanced storing diverts as variables
@subsubsection Advanced: storing diverts as variables
@anchor{#advanced-storing-diverts-as-variables}
A "divert" statement is actually a type of value in itself, and can be
stored, altered, and diverted to.

@verbatim
VAR     current_epilogue = -> everybody_dies

=== continue_or_quit ===
Give up now, or keep trying to save your Kingdom?
*  [Keep trying!]   -> more_hopeless_introspection
*  [Give up]        -> current_epilogue
@end verbatim

@node Advanced Global variables are externally visible
@subsubsection Advanced: Global variables are externally visible
@anchor{#advanced-global-variables-are-externally-visible}
Global variables can be accessed, and altered, from the runtime as well
from the story, so provide a good way to communicate between the wider
game and the story.

The @strong{ink} layer is often be a good place to store
gameplay-variables; there's no save/load issues to consider, and the
story itself can react to the current values.

@node Printing variables
@subsection Printing variables
@anchor{#printing-variables}
The value of a variable can be printed as content using an inline syntax
similar to sequences, and conditional text:

@verbatim
VAR friendly_name_of_player = "Jackie"
VAR age = 23

My name is Jean Passepartout, but my friends call me {friendly_name_of_player}. I'm {age} years old.
@end verbatim

This can be useful in debugging. For more complex printing based on
logic and variables, see the section on @ref{#5-functions,functions}.

@node Evaluating strings
@subsection Evaluating strings
@anchor{#evaluating-strings}
It might be noticed that above we refered to variables as being able to
contain "content", rather than "strings". That was deliberate, because a
string defined in ink can contain ink - although it will always evaluate
to a string. (Yikes!)

@verbatim
VAR a_colour = ""

~ a_colour = "{~red|blue|green|yellow}"

{a_colour}
@end verbatim

... produces one of red, blue, green or yellow.

Note that once a piece of content like this is evaluated, its value is
"sticky". (The quantum state collapses.) So the following:

@verbatim
The goon hits you, and sparks fly before you eyes, {a_colour} and {a_colour}.
@end verbatim

... won't produce a very interesting effect. (If you really want this to
work, use a text function to print the colour!)

This is also why

@verbatim
VAR a_colour = "{~red|blue|green|yellow}"
@end verbatim

is explicitly disallowed; it would be evaluated on the construction of
the story, which probably isn't what you want.

@node 2 Logic
@section 2) Logic
@anchor{#2-logic}
Obviously, our global variables are not intended to be constants, so we
need a syntax for altering them.

Since by default, any text in an @strong{ink} script is printed out
directly to the screen, we use a markup symbol to indicate that a line
of content is intended meant to be doing some numerical work, we use the
@code{~} mark.

The following statements all assign values to variables:

@verbatim
=== set_some_variables ===
    ~ knows_about_wager = true
    ~ x = (x * x) - (y * y) + c
    ~ y = 2 * x * y
@end verbatim

and the following will test conditions:

@verbatim
{ x == 1.2 }
{ x / 2 > 4 }
{ y - 1 <= x * x }
@end verbatim

@menu
* Mathematics::
* String queries::
@end menu

@node Mathematics
@subsection Mathematics
@anchor{#mathematics}
@strong{ink} supports the four basic mathematical operations (@code{+},
@code{-}, @code{*} and @code{/}), as well as @code{%} (or @code{mod}),
which returns the remainder after integer division. There's also POW for
to-the-power-of:

@verbatim
{POW(3, 2)} is 9.
{POW(16, 0.5)} is 4.
@end verbatim

If more complex operations are required, one can write functions (using
recursion if necessary), or call out to external, game-code functions
(for anything more advanced).

@menu
* RANDOMmin max::
* Advanced numerical types are implicit::
* Advanced INT FLOOR and FLOAT::
@end menu

@node RANDOMmin max
@subsubsection RANDOM(min, max)
@anchor{#randommin-max}
Ink can generate random integers if required using the RANDOM function.
RANDOM is authored to be like a dice (yes, pendants, we said @emph{a
dice}), so the min and max values are both inclusive.

@verbatim
~ temp dice_roll = RANDOM(1, 6)

~ temp lazy_grading_for_test_paper = RANDOM(30, 75)

~ temp number_of_heads_the_serpent_has = RANDOM(3, 8)
@end verbatim

The random number generator can be seeded for testing purposes, see the
section of Game Queries and Functions section above.

@node Advanced numerical types are implicit
@subsubsection Advanced: numerical types are implicit
@anchor{#advanced-numerical-types-are-implicit}
Results of operations - in particular, for division - are typed based on
the type of the input. So integer division returns integer, but floating
point division returns floating point results.

@verbatim
~ x = 2 / 3
~ y = 7 / 3
~ z = 1.2 / 0.5
@end verbatim

assigns @code{x} to be 0, @code{y} to be 2 and @code{z} to be 2.4.

@node Advanced INT FLOOR and FLOAT
@subsubsection Advanced: INT(), FLOOR() and FLOAT()
@anchor{#advanced-int-floor-and-float}
In cases where you don't want implicit types, or you want to round off a
variable, you can cast it directly.

@verbatim
{INT(3.2)} is 3.
{FLOOR(4.8)} is 4.
{INT(-4.8)} is -4.
{FLOOR(-4.8)} is -5.

{FLOAT(4)} is, um, still 4.
@end verbatim

@node String queries
@subsection String queries
@anchor{#string-queries}
Oddly for a text-engine, @strong{ink} doesn't have much in the way of
string-handling: it's assumed that any string conversion you need to do
will be handled by the game code (and perhaps by external functions.)
But we support three basic queries - equality, inequality, and substring
(which we call ? for reasons that will become clear in a later chapter).

The following all return true:

@verbatim
{ "Yes, please." == "Yes, please." }
{ "No, thank you." != "Yes, please." }
{ "Yes, please" ? "ease" }
@end verbatim

@node 3 Conditional blocks if/else
@section 3) Conditional blocks (if/else)
@anchor{#3-conditional-blocks-ifelse}
We've seen conditionals used to control options and story content;
@strong{ink} also provides an equivalent of the normal if/else-if/else
structure.

@menu
* A simple 'if'::
* Extended if/else if/else blocks::
* Switch blocks::
* Conditional blocks are not limited to logic::
* Multiline blocks::
@end menu

@node A simple 'if'
@subsection A simple 'if'
@anchor{#a-simple-if}
The if syntax takes its cue from the other conditionals used so far,
with the @code{@{}...@code{@}} syntax indicating that something is being
tested.

@verbatim
{ x > 0:
    ~ y = x - 1
}
@end verbatim

Else conditions can be provided:

@verbatim
{ x > 0:
    ~ y = x - 1
- else:
    ~ y = x + 1
}
@end verbatim

@node Extended if/else if/else blocks
@subsection Extended if/else if/else blocks
@anchor{#extended-ifelse-ifelse-blocks}
The above syntax is actually a specific case of a more general
structure, something like a "switch" statement of another language:

@verbatim
{
    - x > 0:
        ~ y = x - 1
    - else:
        ~ y = x + 1
}
@end verbatim

And using this form we can include 'else-if' conditions:

@verbatim
{
    - x == 0:
        ~ y = 0
    - x > 0:
        ~ y = x - 1
    - else:
        ~ y = x + 1
}
@end verbatim

(Note, as with everything else, the white-space is purely for
readability and has no syntactic meaning.)

@node Switch blocks
@subsection Switch blocks
@anchor{#switch-blocks}
And there's also an actual switch statement:

@verbatim
{ x:
- 0:    zero
- 1:    one
- 2:    two
- else: lots
}
@end verbatim

@menu
* Example context-relevant content::
@end menu

@node Example context-relevant content
@subsubsection Example: context-relevant content
@anchor{#example-context-relevant-content}
Note these tests don't have to be variable-based and can use
read-counts, just as other conditionals can, and the following
construction is quite frequent, as a way of saying "do some content
which is relevant to the current game state":

@verbatim
=== dream ===
    {
        - visited_snakes && not dream_about_snakes:
            ~ fear++
            -> dream_about_snakes

        - visited_poland && not dream_about_polish_beer:
            ~ fear--
            -> dream_about_polish_beer

        - else:
            // breakfast-based dreams have no effect
            -> dream_about_marmalade
    }
@end verbatim

The syntax has the advantage of being easy to extend, and prioritise.

@node Conditional blocks are not limited to logic
@subsection Conditional blocks are not limited to logic
@anchor{#conditional-blocks-are-not-limited-to-logic}
Conditional blocks can be used to control story content as well as
logic:

@verbatim
I stared at Monsieur Fogg.
{ know_about_wager:
    <> "But surely you are not serious?" I demanded.
- else:
    <> "But there must be a reason for this trip," I observed.
}
He said nothing in reply, merely considering his newspaper with as much thoroughness as entomologist considering his latest pinned addition.
@end verbatim

You can even put options inside conditional blocks:

@verbatim
{ door_open:
    *   I strode out of the compartment[] and I fancied I heard my master quietly tutting to himself.           -> go_outside
- else:
    *   I asked permission to leave[] and Monsieur Fogg looked surprised.   -> open_door
    *   I stood and went to open the door[]. Monsieur Fogg seemed untroubled by this small rebellion. -> open_door
}
@end verbatim

...but note that the lack of weave-syntax and nesting in the above
example isn't accidental: to avoid confusing the various kinds of
nesting at work, you aren't allowed to include gather points inside
conditional blocks.

@node Multiline blocks
@subsection Multiline blocks
@anchor{#multiline-blocks}
There's one other class of multiline block, which expands on the
alternatives system from above. The following are all valid and do what
you might expect:

@verbatim
// Sequence: go through the alternatives, and stick on last
{ stopping:
    -   I entered the casino.
    -  I entered the casino again.
    -  Once more, I went inside.
}

// Shuffle: show one at random
At the table, I drew a card. <>
{ shuffle:
    -   Ace of Hearts.
    -   King of Spades.
    -   2 of Diamonds.
        'You lose this time!' crowed the croupier.
}

// Cycle: show each in turn, and then cycle
{ cycle:
    - I held my breath.
    - I waited impatiently.
    - I paused.
}

// Once: show each, once, in turn, until all have been shown
{ once:
    - Would my luck hold?
    - Could I win the hand?
}
@end verbatim

@menu
* Advanced modified shuffles::
@end menu

@node Advanced modified shuffles
@subsubsection Advanced: modified shuffles
@anchor{#advanced-modified-shuffles}
The shuffle block above is really a "shuffled cycle"; in that it'll
shuffle the content, play through it, then reshuffle and go again.

There are two other versions of shuffle:

@code{shuffle once} which will shuffle the content, play through it, and
then do nothing.

@verbatim
{ shuffle once:
-   The sun was hot.
-   It was a hot day.
}
@end verbatim

@code{shuffle stopping} will shuffle all the content (except the last
entry), and once its been played, it'll stick on the last entry.

@verbatim
{ shuffle stopping:
-   A silver BMW roars past.
-   A bright yellow Mustang takes the turn.
-   There are like, cars, here.
}
@end verbatim

@node 4 Temporary Variables
@section 4) Temporary Variables
@anchor{#4-temporary-variables}

@menu
* Temporary variables are for scratch calculations::
* Knots and stitches can take parameters::
@end menu

@node Temporary variables are for scratch calculations
@subsection Temporary variables are for scratch calculations
@anchor{#temporary-variables-are-for-scratch-calculations}
Sometimes, a global variable is unwieldy. @strong{ink} provides
temporary variables for quick calculations of things.

@verbatim
=== near_north_pole ===
    ~ temp number_of_warm_things = 0
    { blanket:
        ~ number_of_warm_things++
    }
    { ear_muffs:
        ~ number_of_warm_things++
    }
    { gloves:
        ~ number_of_warm_things++
    }
    { number_of_warm_things > 2:
        Despite the snow, I felt incorrigibly snug.
    - else:
        That night I was colder than I have ever been.
    }
@end verbatim

The value in a temporary variable is thrown away after the story leaves
the stitch in which it was defined.

@node Knots and stitches can take parameters
@subsection Knots and stitches can take parameters
@anchor{#knots-and-stitches-can-take-parameters}
A particularly useful form of temporary variable is a parameter. Any
knot or stitch can be given a value as a parameter.

@verbatim
*   [Accuse Hasting]
        -> accuse("Hastings")
*   [Accuse Mrs Black]
        -> accuse("Claudia")
*   [Accuse myself]
        -> accuse("myself")

=== accuse(who) ===
    "I accuse {who}!" Poirot declared.
    "Really?" Japp replied. "{who == "myself":You did it?|{who}?}"
    "And why not?" Poirot shot back.
@end verbatim

... and you'll need to use parameters if you want to pass a temporary
value from one stitch to another!

@menu
* Example a recursive knot definition::
* Advanced sending divert targets as parameters::
@end menu

@node Example a recursive knot definition
@subsubsection Example: a recursive knot definition
@anchor{#example-a-recursive-knot-definition}
Temporary variables are safe to use in recursion (unlike globals), so
the following will work.

@verbatim
-> add_one_to_one_hundred(0, 1)

=== add_one_to_one_hundred(total, x) ===
    ~ total = total + x
    { x == 100:
        -> finished(total)
    - else:
        -> add_one_to_one_hundred(total, x + 1)
    }

=== finished(total) ===
    "The result is {total}!" you announce.
    Gauss stares at you in horror.
    -> END
@end verbatim

(In fact, this kind of definition is useful enough that @strong{ink}
provides a special kind of knot, called, imaginatively enough, a
@code{function}, which comes with certain restrictions and can return a
value. See the section below.)

@node Advanced sending divert targets as parameters
@subsubsection Advanced: sending divert targets as parameters
@anchor{#advanced-sending-divert-targets-as-parameters}
Knot/stitch addresses are a type of value, indicated by a @code{->}
character, and can be stored and passed around. The following is
therefore legal, and often useful:

@verbatim
=== sleeping_in_hut ===
    You lie down and close your eyes.
    -> generic_sleep (-> waking_in_the_hut)

===  generic_sleep (-> waking)
    You sleep perchance to dream etc. etc.
    -> waking

=== waking_in_the_hut
    You get back to your feet, ready to continue your journey.
@end verbatim

...but note the @code{->} in the @code{generic_sleep} definition: that's
the one case in @strong{ink} where a parameter needs to be typed:
because it's too easy to otherwise accidentally do the following:

@verbatim
=== sleeping_in_hut ===
    You lie down and close your eyes.
    -> generic_sleep (waking_in_the_hut)
@end verbatim

... which sends the read count of @code{waking_in_the_hut} into the
sleeping knot, and then attempts to divert to it.

@node 5 Functions
@section 5) Functions
@anchor{#5-functions}
The use of parameters on knots means they are almost functions in the
usual sense, but they lack one key concept - that of the call stack, and
the use of return values.

@strong{ink} includes functions: they are knots, with the following
limitations and features:

A function:

@itemize
@item
cannot contain stitches
@item
cannot use diverts or offer choices
@item
can call other functions
@item
can include printed content
@item
can return a value of any type
@item
can recurse safely
@end itemize

(Some of these may seem quite limiting, but for more story-oriented
call-stack-style features, see the section on @ref{#1-tunnels,Tunnels}.)

Return values are provided via the @code{~ return} statement.

@menu
* Defining and calling functions::
* Functions don't have to return anything::
* Functions can be called inline::
* Parameters can be passed by reference::
@end menu

@node Defining and calling functions
@subsection Defining and calling functions
@anchor{#defining-and-calling-functions}
To define a function, simply declare a knot to be one:

@verbatim
=== function say_yes_to_everything ===
    ~ return true

=== function lerp(a, b, k) ===
    ~ return ((b - a) * k) + a
@end verbatim

Functions are called by name, and with brackets, even if they have no
parameters:

@verbatim
~ x = lerp(2, 8, 0.3)

*   {say_yes_to_everything()} 'Yes.'
@end verbatim

As in any other language, a function, once done, returns the flow to
wherever it was called from - and despite not being allowed to divert
the flow, functions can still call other functions.

@verbatim
=== function say_no_to_nothing ===
    ~ return say_yes_to_everything()
@end verbatim

@node Functions don't have to return anything
@subsection Functions don't have to return anything
@anchor{#functions-dont-have-to-return-anything}
A function does not need to have a return value, and can simply do
something that is worth packaging up:

@verbatim
=== function harm(x) ===
    { stamina < x:
        ~ stamina = 0
    - else:
        ~ stamina = stamina - x
    }
@end verbatim

...though remember a function cannot divert, so while the above prevents
a negative Stamina value, it won't kill a player who hits zero.

@node Functions can be called inline
@subsection Functions can be called inline
@anchor{#functions-can-be-called-inline}
Functions can be called on @code{~} content lines, but can also be
called during a piece of content. In this context, the return value, if
there is one, is printed (as well as anything else the function wants to
print.) If there is no return value, nothing is printed.

Content is, by default, 'glued in', so the following:

@verbatim
Monsieur Fogg was looking {describe_health(health)}.

=== function describe_health(x) ===
{
- x == 100:
    ~ return "spritely"
- x > 75:
    ~ return "chipper"
- x > 45:
    ~ return "somewhat flagging"
- else:
    ~ return "despondent"
}
@end verbatim

produces:

@verbatim
Monsieur Fogg was looking despondent.
@end verbatim

@menu
* Examples::
* Example turning numbers into words::
@end menu

@node Examples
@subsubsection Examples
@anchor{#examples-1}
For instance, you might include:

@verbatim
=== function max(a,b) ===
    { a < b:
        ~ return b
    - else:
        ~ return a
    }

=== function exp(x, e) ===
    // returns x to the power e where e is an integer
    { e <= 0:
        ~ return 1
    - else:
        ~ return x * exp(x, e - 1)
    }
@end verbatim

Then:

@verbatim
The maximum of 2^5 and 3^3 is {max(exp(2,5), exp(3,3))}.
@end verbatim

produces:

@verbatim
The maximum of 2^5 and 3^3 is 32.
@end verbatim

@node Example turning numbers into words
@subsubsection Example: turning numbers into words
@anchor{#example-turning-numbers-into-words}
The following example is long, but appears in pretty much every inkle
game to date. (Recall that a hyphenated line inside multiline curly
braces indicates either "a condition to test" or, if the curly brace
began with a variable, "a value to compare against".)

@verbatim
=== function print_num(x) ===
{
    - x >= 1000:
        {print_num(x / 1000)} thousand { x mod 1000 > 0:{print_num(x mod 1000)}}
    - x >= 100:
        {print_num(x / 100)} hundred { x mod 100 > 0:and {print_num(x mod 100)}}
    - x == 0:
        zero
    - else:
        { x >= 20:
            { x / 10:
                - 2: twenty
                - 3: thirty
                - 4: forty
                - 5: fifty
                - 6: sixty
                - 7: seventy
                - 8: eighty
                - 9: ninety
            }
            { x mod 10 > 0:<>-<>}
        }
        { x < 10 || x > 20:
            { x mod 10:
                - 1: one
                - 2: two
                - 3: three
                - 4: four
                - 5: five
                - 6: six
                - 7: seven
                - 8: eight
                - 9: nine
            }
        - else:
            { x:
                - 10: ten
                - 11: eleven
                - 12: twelve
                - 13: thirteen
                - 14: fourteen
                - 15: fifteen
                - 16: sixteen
                - 17: seventeen
                - 18: eighteen
                - 19: nineteen
            }
        }
}
@end verbatim

which enables us to write things like:

@verbatim
~ price = 15

I pulled out {print_num(price)} coins from my pocket and slowly counted them.
"Oh, never mind," the trader replied. "I'll take half." And she took {print_num(price / 2)}, and pushed the rest back over to me.
@end verbatim

@node Parameters can be passed by reference
@subsection Parameters can be passed by reference
@anchor{#parameters-can-be-passed-by-reference}
Function parameters can also be passed 'by reference', meaning that the
function can actually alter the the variable being passed in, instead of
creating a temporary variable with that value.

For instance, most @strong{inkle} stories include the following:

@verbatim
=== function alter(ref x, k) ===
    ~ x = x + k
@end verbatim

Lines such as:

@verbatim
~ gold = gold + 7
~ health = health - 4
@end verbatim

then become:

@verbatim
~ alter(gold, 7)
~ alter(health, -4)
@end verbatim

which are slightly easier to read, and (more usefully) can be done
inline for maximum compactness.

@verbatim
*   I ate a biscuit[] and felt refreshed. {alter(health, 2)}
*   I gave a biscuit to Monsieur Fogg[] and he wolfed it down most undecorously. {alter(foggs_health, 1)}
-   <> Then we continued on our way.
@end verbatim

Wrapping up simple operations in function can also provide a simple
place to put debugging information, if required.

@node 6 Constants
@section 6) Constants
@anchor{#6-constants}

@menu
* Global Constants::
@end menu

@node Global Constants
@subsection Global Constants
@anchor{#global-constants}
Interactive stories often rely on state machines, tracking what stage
some higher level process has reached. There are lots of ways to do
this, but the most conveninent is to use constants.

Sometimes, it's convenient to define constants to be strings, so you can
print them out, for gameplay or debugging purposes.

@verbatim
CONST HASTINGS = "Hastings"
CONST POIROT = "Poirot"
CONST JAPP = "Japp"

VAR current_chief_suspect = HASTINGS

=== review_evidence ===
    { found_japps_bloodied_glove:
        ~ current_chief_suspect = POIROT
    }
    Current Suspect: {current_chief_suspect}
@end verbatim

Sometimes giving them values is useful:

@verbatim
CONST PI = 3.14
CONST VALUE_OF_TEN_POUND_NOTE = 10
@end verbatim

And sometimes the numbers are useful in other ways:

@verbatim
CONST LOBBY = 1
CONST STAIRCASE = 2
CONST HALLWAY = 3

CONST HELD_BY_AGENT = -1

VAR secret_agent_location = LOBBY
VAR suitcase_location = HALLWAY

=== report_progress ===
{
    -  secret_agent_location == suitcase_location:
    The secret agent grabs the suitcase!
    ~ suitcase_location = HELD_BY_AGENT

-  secret_agent_location < suitcase_location:
    The secret agent moves forward.
    ~ secret_agent_location++
}
@end verbatim

Constants are simply a way to allow you to give story states
easy-to-understand names.

@node 7 Advanced Game-side logic
@section 7) Advanced: Game-side logic
@anchor{#7-advanced-game-side-logic}
There are two core ways to provide game hooks in the @strong{ink}
engine. External function declarations in ink allow you to directly call
C# functions in the game, and variable observers are callbacks that are
fired in the game when ink variables are modified. Both of these are
described in @uref{RunningYourInk.md,Running your ink}.

@node Part 4 Advanced Flow Control
@chapter Part 4: Advanced Flow Control
@anchor{#part-4-advanced-flow-control}

@menu
* 1 Tunnels::
* 2 Threads::
@end menu

@node 1 Tunnels
@section 1) Tunnels
@anchor{#1-tunnels}
The default structure for @strong{ink} stories is a "flat" tree of
choices, branching and joining back together, perhaps looping, but with
the story always being "at a certain place".

But this flat structure makes certain things difficult: for example,
imagine a game in which the following interaction can happen:

@verbatim
=== crossing_the_date_line ===
*   "Monsieur!"[] I declared with sudden horror. "I have just realised. We have crossed the international date line!"
-   Monsieur Fogg barely lifted an eyebrow. "I have adjusted for it."
*   I mopped the sweat from my brow[]. A relief!
*   I nodded, becalmed[]. Of course he had!
*  I cursed, under my breath[]. Once again, I had been belittled!
@end verbatim

...but it can happen at several different places in the story. We don't
want to have to write copies of the content for each different place,
but when the content is finished it needs to know where to return to. We
can do this using parameters:

@verbatim
=== crossing_the_date_line(-> return_to) ===
...
-   -> return_to

...

=== outside_honolulu ===
We arrived at the large island of Honolulu.
- (postscript)
    -> crossing_the_date_line(-> done)
- (done)
    -> END

...

=== outside_pitcairn_island ===
The boat sailed along the water towards the tiny island.
- (postscript)
    -> crossing_the_date_line(-> done)
- (done)
    -> END
@end verbatim

Both of these locations now call and execute the same segment of
storyflow, but once finished they return to where they need to go next.

But what if the section of story being called is more complex - what if
it spreads across several knots? Using the above, we'd have to keep
passing the 'return-to' parameter from knot to knot, to ensure we always
knew where to return.

So instead, @strong{ink} integrates this into the language with a new
kind of divert, that functions rather like a subroutine, and is called a
'tunnel'.

@menu
* Tunnels run sub-stories::
@end menu

@node Tunnels run sub-stories
@subsection Tunnels run sub-stories
@anchor{#tunnels-run-sub-stories}
The tunnel syntax looks like a divert, with another divert on the end:

@verbatim
-> crossing_the_date_line ->
@end verbatim

This means "do the crossing_the_date_line story, then continue from
here".

Inside the tunnel itself, the syntax is simplified from the
parameterised example: all we do is end the tunnel using the @code{->->}
statement which means, essentially, "go on".

@verbatim
=== crossing_the_date_line ===
// this is a tunnel!
...
-   ->->
@end verbatim

Note that tunnel knots aren't declared as such, so the compiler won't
check that tunnels really do end in @code{->->} statements, except at
run-time. So you will need to write carefully to ensure that all the
flows into a tunnel really do come out again.

Tunnels can also be chained together, or finish on a normal divert:

@verbatim
...
// this runs the tunnel, then diverts to 'done'
-> crossing_the_date_line -> done
...

...
//this runs one tunnel, then another, then diverts to 'done'
-> crossing_the_date_line -> check_foggs_health -> done
...
@end verbatim

Tunnels can be nested, so the following is valid:

@verbatim
=== plains ===
= night_time
    The dark grass is soft under your feet.
    +   [Sleep]
        -> sleep_here -> wake_here -> day_time
= day_time
    It is time to move on.

=== wake_here ===
    You wake as the sun rises.
    +   [Eat something]
        -> eat_something ->
    +   [Make a move]
    -   ->->

=== sleep_here ===
    You lie down and try to close your eyes.
    -> monster_attacks ->
    Then it is time to sleep.
    -> dream ->
    ->->
@end verbatim

... and so on.

@menu
* Advanced Tunnels can return elsewhere::
* Advanced Tunnels use a call-stack::
@end menu

@node Advanced Tunnels can return elsewhere
@subsubsection Advanced: Tunnels can return elsewhere
@anchor{#advanced-tunnels-can-return-elsewhere}
Sometimes, in a story, things happen. So sometimes a tunnel can't
guarantee that it will always want to go back to where it came from.
@strong{ink} supplies a syntax to allow you to "returning from a tunnel
but actually go somewhere else" but it should be used with caution as
the possibility of getting very confused is very high indeed.

Still, there are cases where it's indispensable:

@verbatim
=== fall_down_cliff 
-> hurt(5) -> 
You're still alive! You pick yourself up and walk on.

=== hurt(x)
    ~ stamina -= x 
    { stamina <= 0:
        ->-> youre_dead
    }

=== youre_dead
Suddenly, there is a white light all around you. Fingers lift an eyepiece from your forehead. 'You lost, buddy. Out of the chair.'
@end verbatim

And even in less drastic situations, we might want to break up the
structure:

@verbatim
-> talk_to_jim ->

 === talk_to_jim
 - (opts)   
    *   [ Ask about the warp lacelles ] 
        -> warp_lacells ->
    *   [ Ask about the shield generators ] 
        -> shield_generators -> 
    *   [ Stop talking ]
        ->->
 - -> opts 

 = warp_lacells
    { shield_generators : ->-> argue }
    "Don't worry about the warp lacelles. They're fine."
    ->->

 = shield_generators
    { warp_lacells : ->-> argue }
    "Forget about the shield generators. They're good."
    ->->
 
 = argue 
    "What's with all these questions?" Jim demands, suddenly. 
    ...
    ->->
@end verbatim

@node Advanced Tunnels use a call-stack
@subsubsection Advanced: Tunnels use a call-stack
@anchor{#advanced-tunnels-use-a-call-stack}
Tunnels are on a call-stack, so can safely recurse.

@node 2 Threads
@section 2) Threads
@anchor{#2-threads}
So far, everything in ink has been entirely linear, despite all the
branching and diverting. But it's actually possible for a writer to
'fork' a story into different sub-sections, to cover more possible
player actions.

We call this 'threading', though it's not really threading in the sense
that computer scientists mean it: it's more like stitching in new
content from various places.

Note that this is definitely an advanced feature: the engineering
stories becomes somewhat more complex once threads are involved!

@menu
* Threads join multiple sections together::
* Uses of threads::
* When does a side-thread end?::
* Using -> DONE::
@end menu

@node Threads join multiple sections together
@subsection Threads join multiple sections together
@anchor{#threads-join-multiple-sections-together}
Threads allow you to compose sections of content from multiple sources
in one go. For example:

@verbatim
== thread_example ==
I had a headache; threading is hard to get your head around.
<- conversation
<- walking


== conversation ==
It was a tense moment for Monty and me.
 * "What did you have for lunch today?"[] I asked.
    "Spam and eggs," he replied.
 * "Nice weather, we're having,"[] I said.
    "I've seen better," he replied.
 - -> house

== walking ==
We continued to walk down the dusty road.
 * [Continue walking]
    -> house

== house ==
Before long, we arrived at his house.
-> END
@end verbatim

It allows multiple sections of story to combined together into a single
section:

@verbatim
I had a headache; threading is hard to get your head around.
It was a tense moment for Monty and me.
We continued to walk down the dusty road.
1: "What did you have for lunch today?"
2: "Nice weather, we're having,"
3: Continue walking
@end verbatim

On encountering a thread statement such as @code{<- conversation}, the
compiler will fork the story flow. The first fork considered will run
the content at @code{conversation}, collecting up any options it finds.
Once it has run out of flow here it'll then run the other fork.

All the content is collected and shown to the player. But when a choice
is chosen, the engine will move to that fork of the story and collapse
and discard the others.

Note that global variables are @emph{not} forked, including the read
counts of knots and stitches.

@node Uses of threads
@subsection Uses of threads
@anchor{#uses-of-threads}
In a normal story, threads might never be needed.

But for games with lots of independent moving parts, threads quickly
become essential. Imagine a game in which characters move independently
around a map: the main story hub for a room might look like the
following:

@verbatim
CONST HALLWAY = 1
CONST OFFICE = 2

VAR player_location = HALLWAY
VAR generals_location = HALLWAY
VAR doctors_location = OFFICE

== run_player_location
    {
        - player_location == HALLWAY: -> hallway
    }

== hallway ==
    <- characters_present(HALLWAY)
    *   [Drawers]   -> examine_drawers
    *   [Wardrobe] -> examine_wardrobe
    *  [Go to Office]   -> go_office
    -   -> run_player_location
= examine_drawers
    // etc...

// Here's the thread, which mixes in dialogue for characters you share the room with at the moment.

== characters_present(room)
    { generals_location == room:
        <- general_conversation
    }
    { doctors_location == room:
        <- doctor_conversation
    }
    -> DONE

== general_conversation
    *   [Ask the General about the bloodied knife]
        "It's a bad business, I can tell you."
    -   -> run_player_location

== doctor_conversation
    *   [Ask the Doctor about the bloodied knife]
        "There's nothing strange about blood, is there?"
    -   -> run_player_location
@end verbatim

Note in particular, that we need an explicit way to return the player
who has gone down a side-thread to return to the main flow. In most
cases, threads will either need a parameter telling them where to return
to, or they'll need to end the current story section.

@node When does a side-thread end?
@subsection When does a side-thread end?
@anchor{#when-does-a-side-thread-end}
Side-threads end when they run out of flow to process: and note, they
collect up options to display later (unlike tunnels, which collect
options, display them and follow them until they hit an explicit return,
possibly several moves later).

Sometimes a thread has no content to offer - perhaps there is no
conversation to have with a character after all, or perhaps we have
simply not written it yet. In that case, we must mark the end of the
thread explicitly.

If we didn't, the end of content might be a story-bug or a hanging story
thread, and we want the compiler to tell us about those.

@node Using -> DONE
@subsection Using @code{-> DONE}
@anchor{#using---done}
In cases where we want to mark the end of a thread, we use
@code{-> DONE}: meaning "the flow intentionally ends here". If we don't,
we might end up with a warning message - we can still play the game, but
it's a reminder that we have unfinished business.

The example at the start of this section will generate a warning; it can
be fixed as follows:

@verbatim
== thread_example ==
I had a headache; threading is hard to get your head around.
<- conversation
<- walking
-> DONE
@end verbatim

The extra DONE tells ink that the flow here has ended and it should rely
on the threads for the next part of the story.

Note that we don't need a @code{-> DONE} if the flow ends with options
that fail their conditions. The engine treats this as a valid,
intentional, end of flow state.

@strong{You do not need a @code{-> DONE} after an option has been
chosen}. Once an option is chosen, a thread is no longer a thread - it
is simply the normal story flow once more.

Using @code{-> END} in this case will not end the thread, but the whole
story flow. (And this is the real reason for having two different ways
to end flow.)

@menu
* Example adding the same choice to several places::
* Example organisation of wide choice points::
@end menu

@node Example adding the same choice to several places
@subsubsection Example: adding the same choice to several places
@anchor{#example-adding-the-same-choice-to-several-places}
Threads can be used to add the same choice into lots of different
places. When using them this way, it's normal to pass a divert as a
parameter, to tell the story where to go after the choice is done.

@verbatim
=== outside_the_house
The front step. The house smells. Of murder. And lavender.
- (top)
    <- review_case_notes(-> top)
    *   [Go through the front door]
        I stepped inside the house.
        -> the_hallway
    *   [Sniff the air]
        I hate lavender. It makes me think of soap, and soap makes me think about my marriage.
        -> top

=== the_hallway
The hallway. Front door open to the street. Little bureau.
- (top)
    <- review_case_notes(-> top)
    *   [Go through the front door]
        I stepped out into the cool sunshine.
        -> outside_the_house
    *   [Open the bureau]
        Keys. More keys. Even more keys. How many locks do these people need?
        -> top

=== review_case_notes(-> go_back_to)
+   {not done || TURNS_SINCE(-> done) > 10}
    [Review my case notes]
    // the conditional ensures you don't get the option to check repeatedly
    {I|Once again, I} flicked through the notes I'd made so far. Still not obvious suspects.
-   (done) -> go_back_to
@end verbatim

Note this is different than a tunnel, which runs the same block of
content but doesn't give a player a choice. So a layout like:

@verbatim
<- childhood_memories(-> next)
*   [Look out of the window]
    I daydreamed as we rolled along...
 - (next) Then the whistle blew...
@end verbatim

might do exactly the same thing as:

@verbatim
*   [Remember my childhood]
    -> think_back ->
*   [Look out of the window]
    I daydreamed as we rolled along...
-   (next) Then the whistle blew...
@end verbatim

but as soon as the option being threaded in includes multiple choices,
or conditional logic on choices (or any text content, of course!), the
thread version becomes more practical.

@node Example organisation of wide choice points
@subsubsection Example: organisation of wide choice points
@anchor{#example-organisation-of-wide-choice-points}
A game which uses ink as a script rather than a literal output might
often generate very large numbers of parallel choices, intended to be
filtered by the player via some other in-game interaction - such as
walking around an environment. Threads can be useful in these cases
simply to divide up choices.

@verbatim
=== the_kitchen
- (top)
    <- drawers(-> top)
    <- cupboards(-> top)
    <- room_exits
= drawers (-> goback)
    // choices about the drawers...
    ...
= cupboards(-> goback)
    // choices about cupboards
    ...
= room_exits
    // exits; doesn't need a "return point" as if you leave, you go elsewhere
    ...
@end verbatim

@node Part 5 Advanced State Tracking
@chapter Part 5: Advanced State Tracking
@anchor{#part-5-advanced-state-tracking}
Games with lots of interaction can get very complex, very quickly and
the writer's job is often as much about maintaining continuity as it is
about content.

This becomes particularly important if the game text is intended to
model anything - whether it's a game of cards, the player's knowledge of
the gameworld so far, or the state of the various light-switches in a
house.

@strong{ink} does not provide a full world-modelling system in the
manner of a classic parser IF authoring language - there are no
"objects", no concepts of "containment" or being "open" or "locked".
However, it does provide a simple yet powerful system for tracking
state-changes in a very flexible way, to enable writers to approximate
world models where necessary.

@menu
* 1 Basic Lists::
* 2 Reusing Lists::
* 3 List Values::
* 4 Multivalued Lists::
* 5 Advanced List Operations::
* 6 Multi-list Lists::
* 7 Long example crime scene::
* 8 Summary::
@end menu

@node Note New feature alert!
@subsubsection Note: New feature alert!
@anchor{#note-new-feature-alert}
This feature is very new to the language. That means we haven't begun to
discover all the ways it might be used - but we're pretty sure it's
going to be useful! So if you think of a clever usage we'd love to know!

@node 1 Basic Lists
@section 1) Basic Lists
@anchor{#1-basic-lists}
The basic unit of state-tracking is a list of states, defined using the
@code{LIST} keyword. Note that a list is really nothing like a C# list
(which is an array).

For instance, we might have:

@verbatim
LIST kettleState = cold, boiling, recently_boiled
@end verbatim

This line defines two things: firstly three new values - @code{cold},
@code{boiling} and @code{recently_boiled} - and secondly, a variable,
called @code{kettleState}, to hold these states.

We can tell the list what value to take:

@verbatim
~ kettleState = cold
@end verbatim

We can change the value:

@verbatim
*   [Turn on kettle]
    The kettle begins to bubble and boil.
    ~ kettleState = boiling
@end verbatim

We can query the value:

@verbatim
*   [Touch the kettle]
    { kettleState == cold:
        The kettle is cool to the touch.
    - else:
        The outside of the kettle is very warm!
    }
@end verbatim

For convenience, we can give a list a value when it's defined using a
bracket:

@verbatim
LIST kettleState = cold, (boiling), recently_boiled
// at the start of the game, this kettle is switched on. Edgy, huh?
@end verbatim

...and if the notation for that looks a bit redundant, there's a reason
for that coming up in a few subsections time.

@node 2 Reusing Lists
@section 2) Reusing Lists
@anchor{#2-reusing-lists}
The above example is fine for the kettle, but what if we have a pot on
the stove as well? We can then define a list of states, but put them
into variables - and as many variables as we want.

@verbatim
LIST daysOfTheWeek = Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday
VAR today = Monday
VAR tomorrow = Tuesday
@end verbatim

@menu
* States can be used repeatedly::
@end menu

@node States can be used repeatedly
@subsection States can be used repeatedly
@anchor{#states-can-be-used-repeatedly}
This allows us to use the same state machine in multiple places.

@verbatim
LIST heatedWaterStates = cold, boiling, recently_boiled
VAR kettleState = cold
VAR potState = cold

*   {kettleState == cold} [Turn on kettle]
    The kettle begins to boil and bubble.
    ~ kettleState = boiling
*   {potState == cold} [Light stove]
    The water in the pot begins to boil and bubble.
    ~ potState = boiling
@end verbatim

But what if we add a microwave as well? We might want start generalising
our functionality a bit:

@verbatim
LIST heatedWaterStates = cold, boiling, recently_boiled
VAR kettleState = cold
VAR potState = cold
VAR microwaveState = cold

=== function boilSomething(ref thingToBoil, nameOfThing)
    The {nameOfThing} begins to heat up.
    ~ thingToBoil = boiling

=== do_cooking
*   {kettleState == cold} [Turn on kettle]
    {boilSomething(kettleState, "kettle")}
*   {potState == cold} [Light stove]
    {boilSomething(potState, "pot")}
*   {microwaveState == cold} [Turn on microwave]
    {boilSomething(microwaveState, "microwave")}
@end verbatim

or even...

@verbatim
LIST heatedWaterStates = cold, boiling, recently_boiled
VAR kettleState = cold
VAR potState = cold
VAR microwaveState = cold

=== cook_with(nameOfThing, ref thingToBoil)
+   {thingToBoil == cold} [Turn on {nameOfThing}]
    The {nameOfThing} begins to heat up.
    ~ thingToBoil = boiling
    -> do_cooking.done

=== do_cooking
<- cook_with("kettle", kettleState)
<- cook_with("pot", potState)
<- cook_with("microwave", microwaveState)
- (done)
@end verbatim

Note that the "heatedWaterStates" list is still available as well, and
can still be tested, and take a value.

@menu
* List values can share names::
* Advanced a LIST is actually a variable::
@end menu

@node List values can share names
@subsubsection List values can share names
@anchor{#list-values-can-share-names}
Reusing lists brings with it ambiguity. If we have:

@verbatim
LIST colours = red, green, blue, purple
LIST moods = mad, happy, blue

VAR status = blue
@end verbatim

... how can the compiler know which blue you meant?

We resolve these using a @code{.} syntax similar to that used for knots
and stitches.

@verbatim
VAR status = colours.blue
@end verbatim

...and the compiler will issue an error until you specify.

Note the "family name" of the state, and the variable containing a
state, are totally separate. So

@verbatim
{ statesOfGrace == statesOfGrace.fallen:
    // is the current state "fallen"
}
@end verbatim

... is correct.

@node Advanced a LIST is actually a variable
@subsubsection Advanced: a LIST is actually a variable
@anchor{#advanced-a-list-is-actually-a-variable}
One surprising feature is the statement

@verbatim
LIST statesOfGrace = ambiguous, saintly, fallen
@end verbatim

actually does two things simultaneously: it creates three values,
@code{ambiguous}, @code{saintly} and @code{fallen}, and gives them the
name-parent @code{statesOfGrace} if needed; and it creates a variable
called @code{statesOfGrace}.

And that variable can be used like a normal variable. So the following
is valid, if horribly confusing and a bad idea:

@verbatim
LIST statesOfGrace = ambiguous, saintly, fallen

~ statesOfGrace = 3.1415 // set the variable to a number not a list value
@end verbatim

...and it wouldn't preclude the following from being fine:

@verbatim
~ temp anotherStateOfGrace = statesOfGrace.saintly
@end verbatim

@node 3 List Values
@section 3) List Values
@anchor{#3-list-values}
When a list is defined, the values are listed in an order, and that
order is considered to be significant. In fact, we can treat these
values as if they @emph{were} numbers. (That is to say, they are enums.)

@verbatim
LIST volumeLevel = off, quiet, medium, loud, deafening
VAR lecturersVolume = quiet
VAR murmurersVolume = quiet

{ lecturersVolume < deafening:
    ~ lecturersVolume++

    { lecturersVolume > murmurersVolume:
        ~ murmurersVolume++
        The murmuring gets louder.
    }
}
@end verbatim

The values themselves can be printed using the usual @code{@{...@}}
syntax, but this will print their name.

@verbatim
The lecturer's voice becomes {lecturersVolume}.
@end verbatim

@menu
* Converting values to numbers::
* Converting numbers to values::
* Advanced defining your own numerical values::
@end menu

@node Converting values to numbers
@subsection Converting values to numbers
@anchor{#converting-values-to-numbers}
The numerical value, if needed, can be got explicitly using the
LIST_VALUE function. Note the first value in a list has the value 1, and
not the value 0.

@verbatim
The lecturer has {LIST_VALUE(deafening) - LIST_VALUE(lecturersVolume)} notches still available to him.
@end verbatim

@node Converting numbers to values
@subsection Converting numbers to values
@anchor{#converting-numbers-to-values}
You can go the other way by using the list's name as a function:

@verbatim
LIST Numbers = one, two, three
VAR score = one
~ score = Numbers(2) // score will be "two"
@end verbatim

@node Advanced defining your own numerical values
@subsection Advanced: defining your own numerical values
@anchor{#advanced-defining-your-own-numerical-values}
By default, the values in a list start at 1 and go up by one each time,
but you can specify your own values if you need to.

@verbatim
LIST primeNumbers = two = 2, three = 3, five = 5
@end verbatim

If you specify a value, but not the next value, ink will assume an
increment of 1. So the following is the same:

@verbatim
LIST primeNumbers = two = 2, three, five = 5
@end verbatim

@node 4 Multivalued Lists
@section 4) Multivalued Lists
@anchor{#4-multivalued-lists}
The following examples have all included one deliberate untruth, which
we'll now remove. Lists - and variables containing list values - do not
have to contain only one value.

@menu
* Lists are boolean sets::
* Basic Queries::
* The "full" list::
* Example Tower of Hanoi::
@end menu

@node Lists are boolean sets
@subsection Lists are boolean sets
@anchor{#lists-are-boolean-sets}
A list variable is not a variable containing a number. Rather, a list is
like the in/out nameboard in an accommodation block. It contains a list
of names, each of which has a room-number associated with it, and a
slider to say "in" or "out".

Maybe no one is in:

@verbatim
LIST DoctorsInSurgery = Adams, Bernard, Cartwright, Denver, Eamonn
@end verbatim

Maybe everyone is:

@verbatim
LIST DoctorsInSurgery = (Adams), (Bernard), (Cartwright), (Denver), (Eamonn)
@end verbatim

Or maybe some are and some aren't:

@verbatim
LIST DoctorsInSurgery = (Adams), Bernard, (Cartwright), Denver, Eamonn
@end verbatim

Names in brackets are included in the initial state of the list.

Note that if you're defining your own values, you can place the brackets
around the whole term or just the name:

@verbatim
LIST primeNumbers = (two = 2), (three) = 3, (five = 5)
@end verbatim

@menu
* Assiging multiple values::
* Adding and removing entries::
@end menu

@node Assiging multiple values
@subsubsection Assiging multiple values
@anchor{#assiging-multiple-values}
We can assign all the values of the list at once as follows:

@verbatim
~ DoctorsInSurgery = (Adams, Bernard)
~ DoctorsInSurgery = (Adams, Bernard, Eamonn)
@end verbatim

We can assign the empty list to clear a list out:

@verbatim
~ DoctorsInSurgery = ()
@end verbatim

@node Adding and removing entries
@subsubsection Adding and removing entries
@anchor{#adding-and-removing-entries}
List entries can be added and removed, singly or collectively.

@verbatim
~ DoctorsInSurgery = DoctorsInSurgery + Adams
~ DoctorsInSurgery += Adams  // this is the same as the above
~ DoctorsInSurgery -= Eamonn
~ DoctorsInSurgery += (Eamonn, Denver)
~ DoctorsInSurgery -= (Adams, Eamonn, Denver)
@end verbatim

Trying to add an entry that's already in the list does nothing. Trying
to remove an entry that's not there also does nothing. Neither produces
an error, and a list can never contain duplicate entries.

@node Basic Queries
@subsection Basic Queries
@anchor{#basic-queries}
We have a few basic ways of getting information about what's in a list:

@verbatim
LIST DoctorsInSurgery = (Adams), Bernard, (Cartwright), Denver, Eamonn

{LIST_COUNT(DoctorsInSurgery)}  //  "2"
{LIST_MIN(DoctorsInSurgery)}        //  "Adams"
{LIST_MAX(DoctorsInSurgery)}        //  "Cartwright"
{LIST_RANDOM(DoctorsInSurgery)}     //  "Adams" or "Cartwright"
@end verbatim

@menu
* Testing for emptiness::
* Testing for exact equality::
* Testing for containment::
* Warning no lists contain the empty list::
* Example basic knowledge tracking::
* Example a doctor's surgery::
* Advanced nicer list printing::
* Lists don't need to have multiple entries::
@end menu

@node Testing for emptiness
@subsubsection Testing for emptiness
@anchor{#testing-for-emptiness}
Like most values in ink, a list can be tested "as it is", and will
return true, unless it's empty.

@verbatim
{ DoctorsInSurgery: The surgery is open today. | Everyone has gone home. }
@end verbatim

@node Testing for exact equality
@subsubsection Testing for exact equality
@anchor{#testing-for-exact-equality}
Testing multi-valued lists is slightly more complex than single-valued
ones. Equality (@code{==}) now means 'set equality' - that is, all
entries are identical.

So one might say:

@verbatim
{ DoctorsInSurgery == (Adams, Bernard):
    Dr Adams and Dr Bernard are having a loud argument in one corner.
}
@end verbatim

If Dr Eamonn is in as well, the two won't argue, as the lists being
compared won't be equal - DoctorsInSurgery will have an Eamonn that the
list (Adams, Bernard) doesn't have.

Not equals works as expected:

@verbatim
{ DoctorsInSurgery != (Adams, Bernard):
    At least Adams and Bernard aren't arguing.
}
@end verbatim

@node Testing for containment
@subsubsection Testing for containment
@anchor{#testing-for-containment}
What if we just want to simply ask if Adams and Bernard are present? For
that we use a new operator, @code{has}, otherwise known as @code{?}.

@verbatim
{ DoctorsInSurgery ? (Adams, Bernard):
    Dr Adams and Dr Bernard are having a hushed argument in one corner.
}
@end verbatim

And @code{?} can apply to single values too:

@verbatim
{ DoctorsInSurgery has Eamonn:
    Dr Eamonn is polishing his glasses.
}
@end verbatim

We can also negate it, with @code{hasnt} or @code{!?} (not @code{?}).
Note this starts to get a little complicated as

@verbatim
DoctorsInSurgery !? (Adams, Bernard)
@end verbatim

does not mean neither Adams nor Bernard is present, only that they are
not @emph{both} present (and arguing).

@node Warning no lists contain the empty list
@subsubsection Warning: no lists contain the empty list
@anchor{#warning-no-lists-contain-the-empty-list}
Note that the test

@verbatim
SomeList ? ()
@end verbatim

will always return false, regardless of whether @code{SomeList} itself
is empty. In practice this is the most useful default, as you'll often
want to do tests like:

@verbatim
SilverWeapons ? best_weapon_to_use 
@end verbatim

to fail if the player is empty-handed.

@node Example basic knowledge tracking
@subsubsection Example: basic knowledge tracking
@anchor{#example-basic-knowledge-tracking}
The simplest use of a multi-valued list is for tracking "game flags"
tidily.

@verbatim
LIST Facts = (Fogg_is_fairly_odd),  first_name_phileas, (Fogg_is_English)

{Facts ? Fogg_is_fairly_odd:I smiled politely.|I frowned. Was he a lunatic?}
'{Facts ? first_name_phileas:Phileas|Monsieur}, really!' I cried.
@end verbatim

In particular, it allows us to test for multiple game flags in a single
line.

@verbatim
{ Facts ? (Fogg_is_English, Fogg_is_fairly_odd):
    <> 'I know Englishmen are strange, but this is *incredible*!'
}
@end verbatim

@node Example a doctor's surgery
@subsubsection Example: a doctor's surgery
@anchor{#example-a-doctors-surgery}
We're overdue a fuller example, so here's one.

@verbatim
LIST DoctorsInSurgery = (Adams), Bernard, Cartwright, (Denver), Eamonn

-> waiting_room

=== function whos_in_today()
    In the surgery today are {DoctorsInSurgery}.

=== function doctorEnters(who)
    { DoctorsInSurgery !? who:
        ~ DoctorsInSurgery += who
        Dr {who} arrives in a fluster.
    }

=== function doctorLeaves(who)
    { DoctorsInSurgery ? who:
        ~ DoctorsInSurgery -= who
        Dr {who} leaves for lunch.
    }

=== waiting_room
    {whos_in_today()}
    *   [Time passes...]
        {doctorLeaves(Adams)} {doctorEnters(Cartwright)} {doctorEnters(Eamonn)}
        {whos_in_today()}
@end verbatim

This produces:

@verbatim
In the surgery today are Adams, Denver.

> Time passes...

Dr Adams leaves for lunch. Dr Cartwright arrives in a fluster. Dr Eamonn arrives in a fluster.

In the surgery today are Cartwright, Denver, Eamonn.
@end verbatim

@node Advanced nicer list printing
@subsubsection Advanced: nicer list printing
@anchor{#advanced-nicer-list-printing}
The basic list print is not especially attractive for use in-game. The
following is better:

@verbatim
=== function listWithCommas(list, if_empty)
    {LIST_COUNT(list):
    - 2:
            {LIST_MIN(list)} and {listWithCommas(list - LIST_MIN(list), if_empty)}
    - 1:
            {list}
    - 0:
            {if_empty}
    - else:
            {LIST_MIN(list)}, {listWithCommas(list - LIST_MIN(list), if_empty)}
    }

LIST favouriteDinosaurs = (stegosaurs), brachiosaur, (anklyosaurus), (pleiosaur)

My favourite dinosaurs are {listWithCommas(favouriteDinosaurs, "all extinct")}.
@end verbatim

It's probably also useful to have an is/are function to hand:

@verbatim
=== function isAre(list)
    {LIST_COUNT(list) == 1:is|are}

My favourite dinosaurs {isAre(favouriteDinosaurs)} {listWithCommas(favouriteDinosaurs, "all extinct")}.
@end verbatim

And to be pendantic:

@verbatim
My favourite dinosaur{LIST_COUNT(favouriteDinosaurs) != 1:s} {isAre(favouriteDinosaurs)} {listWithCommas(favouriteDinosaurs, "all extinct")}.
@end verbatim

@node Lists don't need to have multiple entries
@subsubsection Lists don't need to have multiple entries
@anchor{#lists-dont-need-to-have-multiple-entries}
Lists don't @emph{have} to contain multiple values. If you want to use a
list as a state-machine, the examples above will all work - set values
using @code{=}, @code{++} and @code{--}; test them using @code{==},
@code{<}, @code{<=}, @code{>} and @code{>=}. These will all work as
expected.

@node The "full" list
@subsection The "full" list
@anchor{#the-full-list}
Note that @code{LIST_COUNT}, @code{LIST_MIN} and @code{LIST_MAX} are
refering to who's in/out of the list, not the full set of
@emph{possible} doctors. We can access that using

@verbatim
LIST_ALL(element of list)
@end verbatim

or

@verbatim
LIST_ALL(list containing elements of a list)

{LIST_ALL(DoctorsInSurgery)} // Adams, Bernard, Cartwright, Denver, Eamonn
{LIST_COUNT(LIST_ALL(DoctorsInSurgery))} // "5"
{LIST_MIN(LIST_ALL(Eamonn))}                // "Adams"
@end verbatim

Note that printing a list using @code{@{...@}} produces a bare-bones
representation of the list; the values as words, delimited by commas.

@menu
* Advanced "refreshing" a list's type::
* Advanced a portion of the "full" list::
@end menu

@node Advanced "refreshing" a list's type
@subsubsection Advanced: "refreshing" a list's type
@anchor{#advanced-refreshing-a-lists-type}
If you really need to, you can make an empty list that knows what type
of list it is.

@verbatim
LIST ValueList = first_value, second_value, third_value
VAR myList = ()

~ myList = ValueList()
@end verbatim

You'll then be able to do:

@verbatim
{ LIST_ALL(myList) }
@end verbatim

@node Advanced a portion of the "full" list
@subsubsection Advanced: a portion of the "full" list
@anchor{#advanced-a-portion-of-the-full-list}
You can also retrieve just a "slice" of the full list, using the
@code{LIST_RANGE} function. There are two formulations, both valid:

@verbatim
LIST_RANGE(list_name, min_integer_value, max_integer_value)
@end verbatim

and

@verbatim
LIST_RANGE(list_name, min_value, max_value)
@end verbatim

Min and max values here are inclusive. If the game can't find the
values, it'll get as close as it can, but never go outside the range. So
for example:

@verbatim
{LIST_RANGE(LIST_ALL(primeNumbers), 10, 20)} 
@end verbatim

will produce

@verbatim
11, 13, 17, 19
@end verbatim

@node Example Tower of Hanoi
@subsection Example: Tower of Hanoi
@anchor{#example-tower-of-hanoi}
To demonstrate a few of these ideas, here's a functional Tower of Hanoi
example, written so no one else has to write it.

@verbatim
LIST Discs = one, two, three, four, five, six, seven
VAR post1 = ()
VAR post2 = ()
VAR post3 = ()

~ post1 = LIST_ALL(Discs)

-> gameloop

=== function can_move(from_list, to_list) ===
    {
    -   LIST_COUNT(from_list) == 0:
        // no discs to move
        ~ return false
    -   LIST_COUNT(to_list) > 0 && LIST_MIN(from_list) > LIST_MIN(to_list):
        // the moving disc is bigger than the smallest of the discs on the new tower
        ~ return false
    -   else:
         // nothing stands in your way!
        ~ return true

    }

=== function move_ring( ref from, ref to ) ===
    ~ temp whichRingToMove = LIST_MIN(from)
    ~ from -= whichRingToMove
    ~ to += whichRingToMove

== function getListForTower(towerNum)
    { towerNum:
        - 1:    ~ return post1
        - 2:    ~ return post2
        - 3:    ~ return post3
    }

=== function name(postNum)
    the {postToPlace(postNum)} temple

=== function Name(postNum)
    The {postToPlace(postNum)} temple

=== function postToPlace(postNum)
    { postNum:
        - 1: first
        - 2: second
        - 3: third
    }

=== function describe_pillar(listNum) ==
    ~ temp list = getListForTower(listNum)
    {
    - LIST_COUNT(list) == 0:
        {Name(listNum)} is empty.
    - LIST_COUNT(list) == 1:
        The {list} ring lies on {name(listNum)}.
    - else:
        On {name(listNum)}, are the discs numbered {list}.
    }


=== gameloop
    Staring down from the heavens you see your followers finishing construction of the last of the great temples, ready to begin the work.
- (top)
    +  [ Regard the temples]
        You regard each of the temples in turn. On each is stacked the rings of stone. {describe_pillar(1)} {describe_pillar(2)} {describe_pillar(3)}
    <- move_post(1, 2, post1, post2)
    <- move_post(2, 1, post2, post1)
    <- move_post(1, 3, post1, post3)
    <- move_post(3, 1, post3, post1)
    <- move_post(3, 2, post3, post2)
    <- move_post(2, 3, post2, post3)
    -> DONE

= move_post(from_post_num, to_post_num, ref from_post_list, ref to_post_list)
    +   { can_move(from_post_list, to_post_list) }
        [ Move a ring from {name(from_post_num)} to {name(to_post_num)} ]
        { move_ring(from_post_list, to_post_list) }
        { stopping:
        -   The priests far below construct a great harness, and after many years of work, the great stone ring is lifted up into the air, and swung over to the next of the temples.
            The ropes are slashed, and in the blink of an eye it falls once more.
        -   Your next decree is met with a great feast and many sacrifices. After the funeary smoke has cleared, work to shift the great stone ring begins in earnest. A generation grows and falls, and the ring falls into its ordained place.
        -   {cycle:
            - Years pass as the ring is slowly moved.
            - The priests below fight a war over what colour robes to wear, but while they fall and die, the work is still completed.
            }
        }
    -> top
@end verbatim

@node 5 Advanced List Operations
@section 5) Advanced List Operations
@anchor{#5-advanced-list-operations}
The above section covers basic comparisons. There are a few more
powerful features as well, but - as anyone familiar with mathematical
sets will know - things begin to get a bit fiddly. So this section comes
with an 'advanced' warning.

A lot of the features in this section won't be necessary for most games.

@menu
* Comparing lists::
* Inverting lists::
* Intersecting lists::
@end menu

@node Comparing lists
@subsection Comparing lists
@anchor{#comparing-lists}
We can compare lists less than exactly using @code{>}, @code{<},
@code{>=} and @code{<=}. Be warned! The definitions we use are not
exactly standard fare. They are based on comparing the numerical value
of the elements in the lists being tested.

@menu
* "Distinctly bigger than"::
* "Definitely never smaller than"::
* Health warning!::
@end menu

@node "Distinctly bigger than"
@subsubsection "Distinctly bigger than"
@anchor{#distinctly-bigger-than}
@code{LIST_A > LIST_B} means "the smallest value in A is bigger than the
largest values in B": in other words, if put on a number line, the
entirety of A is to the right of the entirety of B. @code{<} does the
same in reverse.

@node "Definitely never smaller than"
@subsubsection "Definitely never smaller than"
@anchor{#definitely-never-smaller-than}
@code{LIST_A >= LIST_B} means - take a deep breath now - "the smallest
value in A is at least the smallest value in B, and the largest value in
A is at least the largest value in B". That is, if drawn on a number
line, the entirety of A is either above B or overlaps with it, but B
does not extend higher than A.

Note that @code{LIST_A > LIST_B} implies @code{LIST_A != LIST_B}, and
@code{LIST_A >= LIST_B} allows @code{LIST_A == LIST_B} but precludes
@code{LIST_A < LIST_B}, as you might hope.

@node Health warning!
@subsubsection Health warning!
@anchor{#health-warning}
@code{LIST_A >= LIST_B} is @emph{not} the same as
@code{LIST_A > LIST_B or LIST_A == LIST_B}.

The moral is, don't use these unless you have a clear picture in your
mind.

@node Inverting lists
@subsection Inverting lists
@anchor{#inverting-lists}
A list can be "inverted", which is the equivalent of going through the
accommodation in/out name-board and flipping every switch to the
opposite of what it was before.

@verbatim
LIST GuardsOnDuty = (Smith), (Jones), Carter, Braithwaite

=== function changingOfTheGuard
    ~ GuardsOnDuty = LIST_INVERT(GuardsOnDuty)
@end verbatim

Note that @code{LIST_INVERT} on an empty list will return a null value,
if the game doesn't have enough context to know what invert. If you need
to handle that case, it's safest to do it by hand:

@verbatim
=== function changingOfTheGuard
    {!GuardsOnDuty: // "is GuardsOnDuty empty right now?"
        ~ GuardsOnDuty = LIST_ALL(Smith)
    - else:
        ~ GuardsOnDuty = LIST_INVERT(GuardsOnDuty)
    }
@end verbatim

@menu
* Footnote::
@end menu

@node Footnote
@subsubsection Footnote
@anchor{#footnote}
The syntax for inversion was originally @code{~ list} but we changed it
because otherwise the line

@verbatim
~ list = ~ list
@end verbatim

was not only functional, but actually caused list to invert itself,
which seemed excessively perverse.

@node Intersecting lists
@subsection Intersecting lists
@anchor{#intersecting-lists}
The @code{has} or @code{?} operator is, somewhat more formally, the "are
you a subset of me" operator, , which includes the sets being equal,
but which doesn't include if the larger set doesn't entirely contain the
smaller set.

To test for "some overlap" between lists, we use the overlap operator,
@code{^}, to get the @emph{intersection}.

@verbatim
LIST CoreValues = strength, courage, compassion, greed, nepotism, self_belief, delusions_of_godhood
VAR desiredValues = (strength, courage, compassion, self_belief )
VAR actualValues =  ( greed, nepotism, self_belief, delusions_of_godhood )

{desiredValues ^ actualValues} // prints "self_belief"
@end verbatim

The result is a new list, so you can test it:

@verbatim
{desiredValues ^ actualValues: The new president has at least one desirable quality.}

{LIST_COUNT(desiredValues ^ actualValues) == 1: Correction, the new president has only one desirable quality. {desiredValues ^ actualValues == self_belief: It's the scary one.}}
@end verbatim

@node 6 Multi-list Lists
@section 6) Multi-list Lists
@anchor{#6-multi-list-lists}
So far, all of our examples have included one large simplification,
again - that the values in a list variable have to all be from the same
list family. But they don't.

This allows us to use lists - which have so far played the role of
state-machines and flag-trackers - to also act as general properties,
which is useful for world modelling.

This is our inception moment. The results are powerful, but also more
like "real code" than anything that's come before.

@menu
* Lists to track objects::
* Lists to track multiple states::
@end menu

@node Lists to track objects
@subsection Lists to track objects
@anchor{#lists-to-track-objects}
For instance, we might define:

@verbatim
LIST Characters = Alfred, Batman, Robin
LIST Props = champagne_glass, newspaper

VAR BallroomContents = (Alfred, Batman, newspaper)
VAR HallwayContents = (Robin, champagne_glass)
@end verbatim

We could then describe the contents of any room by testing its state:

@verbatim
=== function describe_room(roomState)
    { roomState ? Alfred: Alfred is here, standing quietly in a corner. } { roomState ? Batman: Batman's presence dominates all. } { roomState ? Robin: Robin is all but forgotten. }
    <> { roomState ? champagne_glass: A champagne glass lies discarded on the floor. } { roomState ? newspaper: On one table, a headline blares out WHO IS THE BATMAN? AND *WHO* IS HIS BARELY-REMEMBERED ASSISTANT? }
@end verbatim

So then:

@verbatim
{ describe_room(BallroomContents) }
@end verbatim

produces:

@verbatim
Alfred is here, standing quietly in a corner. Batman's presence dominates all.

On one table, a headline blares out WHO IS THE BATMAN? AND *WHO* IS HIS BARELY-REMEMBERED ASSISTANT?
@end verbatim

While:

@verbatim
{ describe_room(HallwayContents) }
@end verbatim

gives:

@verbatim
Robin is all but forgotten.

A champagne glass lies discarded on the floor.
@end verbatim

And we could have options based on combinations of things:

@verbatim
*   { currentRoomState ? (Batman, Alfred) } [Talk to Alfred and Batman]
    'Say, do you two know each other?'
@end verbatim

@node Lists to track multiple states
@subsection Lists to track multiple states
@anchor{#lists-to-track-multiple-states}
We can model devices with multiple states. Back to the kettle again...

@verbatim
LIST OnOff = on, off
LIST HotCold = cold, warm, hot

VAR kettleState = (off, cold) // we need brackets because it's a proper, multi-valued list now

=== function turnOnKettle() ===
{ kettleState ? hot:
    You turn on the kettle, but it immediately flips off again.
- else:
    The water in the kettle begins to heat up.
    ~ kettleState -= off
    ~ kettleState += on
    // note we avoid "=" as it'll remove all existing states
}

=== function can_make_tea() ===
    ~ return kettleState ? (hot, off)
@end verbatim

These mixed states can make changing state a bit trickier, as the off/on
above demonstrates, so the following helper function can be useful.

@verbatim
=== function changeStateTo(ref stateVariable, stateToReach)
    // remove all states of this type
    ~ stateVariable -= LIST_ALL(stateToReach)
    // put back the state we want
    ~ stateVariable += stateToReach
@end verbatim

which enables code like:

@verbatim
~ changeState(kettleState, on)
~ changeState(kettleState, warm)
@end verbatim

@menu
* How does this affect queries?::
@end menu

@node How does this affect queries?
@subsubsection How does this affect queries?
@anchor{#how-does-this-affect-queries}
The queries given above mostly generalise nicely to multi-valued lists

@verbatim
LIST Letters = a,b,c
LIST Numbers = one, two, three

VAR mixedList = (a, three, c)

{LIST_ALL(mixedList)}   // a, one, b, two, c, three
{LIST_COUNT(mixedList)} // 3
{LIST_MIN(mixedList)}   // a
{LIST_MAX(mixedList)}   // three or c, albeit unpredictably

{mixedList ? (a,b) }        // false
{mixedList ^ LIST_ALL(a)}   // a, c

{ mixedList >= (one, a) }   // true
{ mixedList < (three) }     // false

{ LIST_INVERT(mixedList) }            // one, b, two
@end verbatim

@node 7 Long example crime scene
@section 7) Long example: crime scene
@anchor{#7-long-example-crime-scene}
Finally, here's a long example, demonstrating a lot of ideas from this
section in action. You might want to try playing it before reading
through to better understand the various moving parts.

@verbatim
-> murder_scene

// Helper function: popping elements from lists
=== function pop(ref list)
   ~ temp x = LIST_MIN(list) 
   ~ list -= x 
   ~ return x

//
//  System: items can have various states
//  Some are general, some specific to particular items
//


LIST OffOn = off, on
LIST SeenUnseen = unseen, seen

LIST GlassState = (none), steamed, steam_gone
LIST BedState = (made_up), covers_shifted, covers_off, bloodstain_visible

//
// System: inventory
//

LIST Inventory = (none), cane, knife

=== function get(x)
    ~ Inventory += x

//
// System: positioning things
// Items can be put in and on places
//

LIST Supporters = on_desk, on_floor, on_bed, under_bed, held, with_joe

=== function move_to_supporter(ref item_state, new_supporter) ===
    ~ item_state -= LIST_ALL(Supporters)
    ~ item_state += new_supporter


// System: Incremental knowledge.
// Each list is a chain of facts. Each fact supersedes the fact before 
//

VAR knowledgeState = ()

=== function reached (x) 
   ~ return knowledgeState ? x 

=== function between(x, y) 
   ~ return knowledgeState? x && not (knowledgeState ^ y)

=== function reach(statesToSet) 
   ~ temp x = pop(statesToSet)
   {
   - not x: 
      ~ return false 

   - not reached(x):
      ~ temp chain = LIST_ALL(x)
      ~ temp statesGained = LIST_RANGE(chain, LIST_MIN(chain), x)
      ~ knowledgeState += statesGained
      ~ reach (statesToSet)     // set any other states left to set
      ~ return true            // and we set this state, so true
 
    - else:
      ~ return false || reach(statesToSet) 
    }   

//
// Set up the game
//

VAR bedroomLightState = (off, on_desk)

VAR knifeState = (under_bed)


//
// Knowledge chains
//


LIST BedKnowledge = neatly_made, crumpled_duvet, hastily_remade, body_on_bed, murdered_in_bed, murdered_while_asleep

LIST KnifeKnowledge = prints_on_knife, joe_seen_prints_on_knife,joe_wants_better_prints, joe_got_better_prints

LIST WindowKnowledge = steam_on_glass, fingerprints_on_glass, fingerprints_on_glass_match_knife


//
// Content
//

=== murder_scene ===
    The bedroom. This is where it happened. Now to look for clues.
- (top)
    { bedroomLightState ? seen:     <- seen_light  }
    <- compare_prints(-> top)

*   (dobed) [The bed...]
    The bed was low to the ground, but not so low something might not roll underneath. It was still neatly made.
    ~ reach (neatly_made)
    - - (bedhub)
    * *     [Lift the bedcover]
            I lifted back the bedcover. The duvet underneath was crumpled.
            ~ reach (crumpled_duvet)
            ~ BedState = covers_shifted
    * *     (uncover) {reached(crumpled_duvet)}
            [Remove the cover]
            Careful not to disturb anything beneath, I removed the cover entirely. The duvet below was rumpled.
            Not the work of the maid, who was conscientious to a point. Clearly this had been thrown on in a hurry.
            ~ reach (hastily_remade)
            ~ BedState = covers_off
    * *     (duvet) {BedState == covers_off} [ Pull back the duvet ]
            I pulled back the duvet. Beneath it was a sheet, sticky with blood.
            ~ BedState = bloodstain_visible
            ~ reach (body_on_bed)
            Either the body had been moved here before being dragged to the floor - or this is was where the murder had taken place.
    * *     {BedState !? made_up} [ Remake the bed ]
            Carefully, I pulled the bedsheets back into place, trying to make it seem undisturbed.
            ~ BedState = made_up
    * *     [Test the bed]
            I pushed the bed with spread fingers. It creaked a little, but not so much as to be obnoxious.
    * *     (darkunder) [Look under the bed]
            Lying down, I peered under the bed, but could make nothing out.

    * *     {TURNS_SINCE(-> dobed) > 1} [Something else?]
            I took a step back from the bed and looked around.
            -> top
    - -     -> bedhub

*   {darkunder && bedroomLightState ? on_floor && bedroomLightState ? on}
    [ Look under the bed ]
    I peered under the bed. Something glinted back at me.
    - - (reaching)
    * *     [ Reach for it ]
            I fished with one arm under the bed, but whatever it was, it had been kicked far enough back that I couldn't get my fingers on it.
            -> reaching
    * *     {Inventory ? cane} [Knock it with the cane]
            -> knock_with_cane

    * *     {reaching > 1 } [ Stand up ]
            I stood up once more, and brushed my coat down.
            -> top

*   (knock_with_cane) {reaching && TURNS_SINCE(-> reaching) >= 4 &&  Inventory ? cane } [Use the cane to reach under the bed ]
    Positioning the cane above the carpet, I gave the glinting thing a sharp tap. It slid out from the under the foot of the bed.
    ~ move_to_supporter( knifeState, on_floor )
    * *     (standup) [Stand up]
            Satisfied, I stood up, and saw I had knocked free a bloodied knife.
            -> top

    * *     [Look under the bed once more]
            Moving the cane aside, I looked under the bed once more, but there was nothing more there.
            -> standup

*   {knifeState ? on_floor} [Pick up the knife]
    Careful not to touch the handle, I lifted the blade from the carpet.
    ~ get(knife)

*   {Inventory ? knife} [Look at the knife]
    The blood was dry enough. Dry enough to show up partial prints on the hilt!
    ~ reach (prints_on_knife)

*   [   The desk... ]
    I turned my attention to the desk. A lamp sat in one corner, a neat, empty in-tray in the other. There was nothing else out.
    Leaning against the desk was a wooden cane.
    ~ bedroomLightState += seen

    - - (deskstate)
    * *     (pickup_cane) {Inventory !? cane}  [Pick up the cane ]
            ~ get(cane)
          I picked up the wooden cane. It was heavy, and unmarked.

    * *    { bedroomLightState !? on } [Turn on the lamp]
            -> operate_lamp ->

    * *     [Look at the in-tray ]
            I regarded the in-tray, but there was nothing to be seen. Either the victim's papers were taken, or his line of work had seriously dried up. Or the in-tray was all for show.

    + +     (open)  {open < 3} [Open a drawer]
            I tried {a drawer at random|another drawer|a third drawer}. {Locked|Also locked|Unsurprisingly, locked as well}.

    * *     {deskstate >= 2} [Something else?]
            I took a step away from the desk once more.
            -> top

    - -     -> deskstate

*     {(Inventory ? cane) && TURNS_SINCE(-> deskstate) <= 2} [Swoosh the cane]
    I was still holding the cane: I gave it an experimental swoosh. It was heavy indeed, though not heavy enough to be used as a bludgeon.
    But it might have been useful in self-defence. Why hadn't the victim reached for it? Knocked it over?

*   [The window...]
    I went over to the window and peered out. A dismal view of the little brook that ran down beside the house.

    - - (window_opts)
    <- compare_prints(-> window_opts)
    * *     (downy) [Look down at the brook]
            { GlassState ? steamed:
                Through the steamed glass I couldn't see the brook. -> see_prints_on_glass -> window_opts
            }
            I watched the little stream rush past for a while. The house probably had damp but otherwise, it told me nothing.
    * *     (greasy) [Look at the glass]
            { GlassState ? steamed: -> downy }
            The glass in the window was greasy. No one had cleaned it in a while, inside or out.
    * *     { GlassState ? steamed && not see_prints_on_glass && downy && greasy }
            [ Look at the steam ]
            A cold day outside. Natural my breath should steam. -> see_prints_on_glass ->
    + +     {GlassState ? steam_gone} [ Breathe on the glass ]
            I breathed gently on the glass once more. { reached (fingerprints_on_glass): The fingerprints reappeared. }
            ~ GlassState = steamed

    + +     [Something else?]
            { window_opts < 2 || reached (fingerprints_on_glass) || GlassState ? steamed:
                I looked away from the dreary glass.
                {GlassState ? steamed:
                    ~ GlassState = steam_gone
                    <> The steam from my breath faded.
                }
                -> top
            }
            I leant back from the glass. My breath had steamed up the pane a little.
           ~ GlassState = steamed

    - -     -> window_opts

*   {top >= 5} [Leave the room]
    I'd seen enough. I {bedroomLightState ? on:switched off the lamp, then} turned and left the room.
    -> joe_in_hall

-   -> top


= operate_lamp
    I flicked the light switch.
    { bedroomLightState ? on:
        <> The bulb fell dark.
        ~ bedroomLightState += off
        ~ bedroomLightState -= on
    - else:
        { bedroomLightState ? on_floor: <> A little light spilled under the bed.} { bedroomLightState ? on_desk : <> The light gleamed on the polished tabletop. }
        ~ bedroomLightState -= off
        ~ bedroomLightState += on
    }
    ->->


= compare_prints (-> backto)
    *   { between ((fingerprints_on_glass, prints_on_knife),     fingerprints_on_glass_match_knife) } 
[Compare the prints on the knife and the window ]
        Holding the bloodied knife near the window, I breathed to bring out the prints once more, and compared them as best I could.
        Hardly scientific, but they seemed very similar - very similiar indeed.
        ~ reach (fingerprints_on_glass_match_knife)
        -> backto

= see_prints_on_glass
    ~ reach (fingerprints_on_glass)
    {But I could see a few fingerprints, as though someone hadpressed their palm against it.|The fingerprints were quite clear and well-formed.} They faded as I watched.
    ~ GlassState = steam_gone
    ->->

= seen_light
    *   {bedroomLightState !? on} [ Turn on lamp ]
        -> operate_lamp ->

    *   { bedroomLightState !? on_bed  && BedState ? bloodstain_visible }
        [ Move the light to the bed ]
        ~ move_to_supporter(bedroomLightState, on_bed)

        I moved the light over to the bloodstain and peered closely at it. It had soaked deeply into the fibres of the cotton sheet.
        There was no doubt about it. This was where the blow had been struck.
        ~ reach (murdered_in_bed)

    *   { bedroomLightState !? on_desk } {TURNS_SINCE(-> floorit) >= 2 }
        [ Move the light back to the desk ]
        ~ move_to_supporter(bedroomLightState, on_desk)
        I moved the light back to the desk, setting it down where it had originally been.
    *   (floorit) { bedroomLightState !? on_floor && darkunder }
        [Move the light to the floor ]
        ~ move_to_supporter(bedroomLightState, on_floor)
        I picked the light up and set it down on the floor.
    -   -> top

=== joe_in_hall
    My police contact, Joe, was waiting in the hall. 'So?' he demanded. 'Did you find anything interesting?'
- (found)
    *   {found == 1} 'Nothing.'
        He shrugged. 'Shame.'
        -> done
    *   { Inventory ? knife } 'I found the murder weapon.'
        'Good going!' Joe replied with a grin. 'We thought the murderer had gotten rid of it. I'll bag that for you now.'
        ~ move_to_supporter(knifeState, with_joe)

    *   {reached(prints_on_knife)} { knifeState ? with_joe }
        'There are prints on the blade[.'],' I told him.
        He regarded them carefully.
        'Hrm. Not very complete. It'll be hard to get a match from these.'
        ~ reach (joe_seen_prints_on_knife)
    *   { reached((fingerprints_on_glass_match_knife, joe_seen_prints_on_knife)) }
        'They match a set of prints on the window, too.'
        'Anyone could have touched the window,' Joe replied thoughtfully. 'But if they're more complete, they should help us get a decent match!'
        ~ reach (joe_wants_better_prints)
    *   { between(body_on_bed, murdered_in_bed)}
        'The body was moved to the bed at some point[.'],' I told him. 'And then moved back to the floor.'
        'Why?'
        * *     'I don't know.'
                Joe nods. 'All right.'
        * *     'Perhaps to get something from the floor?'
                'You wouldn't move a whole body for that.'
        * *     'Perhaps he was killed in bed.'
                'It's just speculation at this point,' Joe remarks.
    *   { reached(murdered_in_bed) }
        'The victim was murdered in bed, and then the body was moved to the floor.'
        'Why?'
        * *     'I don't know.'
                Joe nods. 'All right, then.'
        * *     'Perhaps the murderer wanted to mislead us.'
                'How so?'
            * * *   'They wanted us to think the victim was awake[.'], I replied thoughtfully. 'That they were meeting their attacker, rather than being stabbed in their sleep.'
            * * *   'They wanted us to think there was some kind of struggle[.'],' I replied. 'That the victim wasn't simply stabbed in their sleep.'
            - - -   'But if they were killed in bed, that's most likely what happened. Stabbed, while sleeping.'
                    ~ reach (murdered_while_asleep)
        * *     'Perhaps the murderer hoped to clean up the scene.'
                'But they were disturbed? It's possible.'

    *   { found > 1} 'That's it.'
        'All right. It's a start,' Joe replied.
        -> done
    -   -> found
-   (done)
    {
    - between(joe_wants_better_prints, joe_got_better_prints):
        ~ reach (joe_got_better_prints)
        <> 'I'll get those prints from the window now.'
    - reached(joe_seen_prints_on_knife):
        <> 'I'll run those prints as best I can.'
    - else:
        <> 'Not much to go on.'
    }
    -> END
@end verbatim

@node 8 Summary
@section 8) Summary
@anchor{#8-summary}
To summarise a difficult section, @strong{ink}'s list construction
provides:

@menu
* Flags::
* State machines::
* Properties::
@end menu

@node Flags
@subsection Flags
@anchor{#flags}
@itemize
@item
Each list entry is an event
@item
Use @code{+=} to mark an event as having occurred
@item
Test using @code{?} and @code{!?}
@end itemize

Example:

@verbatim
LIST GameEvents = foundSword, openedCasket, metGorgon
{ GameEvents ? openedCasket }
{ GameEvents ? (foundSword, metGorgon) }
~ GameEvents += metGorgon
@end verbatim

@node State machines
@subsection State machines
@anchor{#state-machines}
@itemize
@item
Each list entry is a state
@item
Use @code{=} to set the state; @code{++} and @code{--} to step forward
or backward
@item
Test using @code{==}, @code{>} etc
@end itemize

Example:

@verbatim
LIST PancakeState = ingredients_gathered, batter_mix, pan_hot, pancakes_tossed, ready_to_eat
{ PancakeState == batter_mix }
{ PancakeState < ready_to_eat }
~ PancakeState++
@end verbatim

@node Properties
@subsection Properties
@anchor{#properties}
@itemize
@item
Each list is a different property, with values for the states that
property can take (on or off, lit or unlit, etc)
@item
Change state by removing the old state, then adding in the new
@item
Test using @code{?} and @code{!?}
@end itemize

Example:

@verbatim
LIST OnOffState = on, off
LIST ChargeState = uncharged, charging, charged

VAR PhoneState = (off, uncharged)

*   {PhoneState !? uncharged } [Plug in phone]
    ~ PhoneState -= LIST_ALL(ChargeState)
    ~ PhoneState += charging
    You plug the phone into charge.
*   { PhoneState ? (on, charged) } [ Call my mother ]
@end verbatim

@node Part 6 International character support in identifiers
@chapter Part 6: International character support in identifiers
@anchor{#part-6-international-character-support-in-identifiers}
By default, ink has no limitations on the use of non-ASCII characters
inside the story content. However, a limitation currently exsits on the
characters that can be used for names of constants, variables,
stictches, diverts and other named flow elements (a.k.a.
@emph{identifiers}).

Sometimes it is inconvenient for a writer using a non-ASCII language to
write a story because they have to constantly switch to naming
identifiers in ASCII and then switching back to whatever language they
are using for the story. In addition, naming identifiers in the author's
own language could improve the overal readibility of the raw story
format.

In an effort to assist in the above scenario, ink @emph{automatically}
supports a list of pre-defined non-ASCII character ranges that can be
used as identifiers. In general, those ranges have been selected to
include the alpha-numeric subset of the official unicode character
range, which would suffice for naming identifiers. The below section
gives more detailed information on the non-ASCII characters that ink
automatically supports.

@node Supported Identifier Characters
@subsection Supported Identifier Characters
@anchor{#supported-identifier-characters}
The support for the additional character ranges in ink is currently
limited to a predefined set of character ranges.

Below is a listing of the currently supported identifier ranges.

@itemize
@item
@strong{Arabic}

Enables characters for languages of the Arabic family and is a subset of
the official @emph{Arabic} unicode range @code{\u0600}-@code{\u06FF}.

@item
@strong{Armenian}

Enables characters for the Armenian language and is a subset of the
official @emph{Armenian} unicode range @code{\u0530}-@code{\u058F}.

@item
@strong{Cyrillic}

Enables characters for languages using the Cyrillic alphabet and is a
subset of the official @emph{Cyrillic} unicode range
@code{\u0400}-@code{\u04FF}.

@item
@strong{Greek}

Enables characters for languages using the Greek alphabet and is a
subset of the official @emph{Greek and Coptic} unicode range
@code{\u0370}-@code{\u03FF}.

@item
@strong{Hebrew}

Enables characters in Hebrew using the Hebrew alphabet and is a subset
of the official @emph{Hebrew} unicode range @code{\u0590}-@code{\u05FF}.

@item
@strong{Latin Extended A}

Enables an extended character range subset of the Latin alphabet -
completely represented by the official @emph{Latin Extended-A} unicode
range @code{\u0100}-@code{\u017F}.

@item
@strong{Latin Extended B}

Enables an extended character range subset of the Latin alphabet -
completely represented by the official @emph{Latin Extended-B} unicode
range @code{\u0180}-@code{\u024F}.

@item
@strong{Latin 1 Supplement}

Enables an extended character range subset of the Latin alphabet -
completely represented by the official @emph{Latin 1 Supplement} unicode
range @code{\u0080} - @code{\u00FF}.

@end itemize

@strong{NOTE!} ink files should be saved in UTF-8 format, which ensures
that the above character ranges are supported.

If a particular character range that you would like to use within
identifiers isn't supported, feel free to open an
@uref{/inkle/ink/issues/new,issue} or @uref{/inkle/ink/pulls,pull
request} on the main ink repo.
